PART III 
CHAPTER 3. WATER AND 
ELECTROLYTES 
Chapter 3. Water and
Electrolytes  |  143




Image by 
Cassie 
Matias on 
unsplash.co
m / CC0 
Introduction 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Ola i ka wai a ka ‘ōpua 
There is life in the water from the clouds 
Introduction  |  145


Image by Cassie Matias on unsplash.com / CC0 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this chapter you will be able to: 
• 
Describe the importance of water intake for the 
body 
• 
Describe the major aspects of water regulation in 
the body 
• 
Describe the function, balance, sources, and 
consequences of the imbalance of [electrolytes 
• 
Describe the effects and use of popular beverage 
choices 
Maintaining the right level of water in your body is crucial to 
survival, as either too little or too much water in your body will 
result in less-than-optimal functioning. One mechanism to help 
ensure the body maintains water balance is thirst. Thirst is the 
result of your body’s physiology telling your brain to initiate the 
thought to take a drink. Sensory proteins detect when your mouth is 
dry, your blood volume too low, or blood electrolyte concentrations 
too high and send signals to the brain stimulating the conscious 
feeling to drink. 
In the summer of 1965, the assistant football coach of the 
University of Florida Gators requested scientists affiliated with the 
university study why the withering heat of Florida caused so many 
heat-related illnesses in football players and provide a solution to 
increase athletic performance and recovery post-training or game. 
The discovery was that inadequate replenishment of fluids, 
carbohydrates, and electrolytes was the reason for the “wilting” 
of their football players. Based on their research, the scientists 
146  |  Introduction


concocted a drink for the football players containing water, 
carbohydrates, and electrolytes and called it “Gatorade.” In the next 
football season the Gators were nine and two and won the Orange 
Bowl. The Gators’ success launched the sports-drink industry, 
which is now a multibillion-dollar industry that is still dominated by 
Gatorade. 
The latest National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 
covering the period from 2005 to 2008, reports that about 50 
percent of Americans consume sugary drinks daily.1 
Excess consumption of sugary soft drinks have been scientifically 
proven to increase the risk for dental caries, obesity, Type 2 
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. In addition to sugary soft 
drinks, beverages containing added sugars include fruit drinks, 
sports drinks, energy drinks and sweetened bottled waters. 
Sports drinks are designed to rehydrate the body after excessive 
fluid depletion. Electrolytes in particular promote normal 
rehydration to prevent fatigue during physical exertion. Are they a 
good choice for achieving the recommended fluid intake? Are they 
performance and endurance enhancers like they claim? Who should 
drink them? 
Typically, eight ounces of a sports drink provides between fifty 
and eighty calories and 14 to 17 grams of carbohydrate, mostly in 
the form of simple sugars. Sodium and potassium are the most 
commonly included electrolytes in sports drinks, with the levels of 
these in sports drinks being highly variable. The American College 
of Sports Medicine says a sports drink should contain 125 milligrams 
of sodium per 8 ounces as it is helpful in replenishing some of 
1. Ogden C, Kit B, et al. (2011). Consumption of Sugar 
Drinks in the United States, 2005–2008. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. NCHS Data Brief no. 71. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db71.htm. 
Published August 2011. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Introduction  |  147


the sodium lost in sweat and promotes fluid uptake in the small 
intestine, improving hydration. 
In this chapter we will discuss the importance and functions of 
fluid and electrolyte balance in the human body, the consequences 
of getting too much or too little of water and electrolytes, the best 
dietary sources of these nutrients, and healthier beverage choices. 
After reading this chapter you will know what to look for in sports 
drinks and will be able to select the best products to keep hydrated. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
148  |  Introduction


view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=130 
 
Introduction  |  149


Overview of Fluid and 
Electrolyte Balance 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Water is made up of 2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom (Figure 3.1 
“The Water Molecule”). A human body is made up of mostly water. 
An adult consists of about 37 to 42 liters of water, or about eighty 
pounds. Fortunately, humans have compartmentalized tissues; 
otherwise we might just look like a water balloon! Newborns are 
approximately 70 percent water. Adult males typically are composed 
of about 60 percent water and females are about 55 percent water. 
(This gender difference reflects the differences in body-fat content, 
since body fat is practically water-free. This also means that if a 
person gains weight in the form of fat the percentage of total body 
water content declines.) As we age, total body water content also 
diminishes so that by the time we are in our eighties the percent 
of water in our bodies has decreased to around 45 percent. Does 
the loss in body water play a role in the aging process? Alas, no 
one knows. But, we do know that dehydration accelerates the aging 
process whereas keeping hydrated decreases headaches, muscle 
aches, and kidney stones. Additionally a study conducted at the Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle found that women 
who drank more than five glasses of water each day had a 
significantly decreased risk for developing colon cancer.1 
1. Shannon JE, et al. (1996). Relationship of Food Groups 
and Water Intake to Colon Cancer Risk. Cancer, 
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, 5(7), 495–502. 
150  |  Overview of Fluid and
Electrolyte Balance


“Water 
Molecule” by 
Chris 
Martin / 
Public 
Domain 
Figure 3.1 The Water Molecule 
Fluid and Electrolyte Balance 
Although water makes up the largest percentage of body volume, 
it is not actually pure water but rather a mixture of cells, proteins, 
glucose, 
lipoproteins, 
electrolytes, 
and 
other 
substances. 
Electrolytes are substances that, when dissolved in water, dissociate 
into charged ions. Positively charged electrolytes are called cations 
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/5/7/495.long. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Overview of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance  |  151


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
and negatively charged electrolytes are called anions. For example, 
in water sodium chloride (the chemical name for table salt) 
dissociates into sodium cations (Na+) and chloride anions (Cl−). 
Solutes refers to all dissolved substances in a fluid, which may 
be charged, such as sodium (Na+), or uncharged, such as glucose. 
In the human body, water and solutes are distributed into two 
compartments: inside cells, called intracellular, and outside cells, 
called extracellular. The extracellular water compartment is 
subdivided into the spaces between cells also known as interstitial, 
blood plasma, and other bodily fluids such as the cerebrospinal fluid 
which surrounds and protects the brain and spinal cord (Figure 3.2 
“Distribution of Body Water”). The composition of solutes differs 
between the fluid compartments. For instance, more protein is 
inside cells than outside and more chloride anions exist outside of 
cells than inside. 
Figure 3.2 Distribution of Body Water 
Osmoregulation 
One of the essential homeostatic functions of the body is to 
maintain fluid balance and the differences in solute composition 
152  |  Overview of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance


between cells and their surrounding environment. Osmoregulation 
is the control of fluid balance and composition in the body. The 
processes involved keep fluids from becoming too dilute or too 
concentrated. Fluid compartments are separated by selectively 
permeable membranes, which allow some things, such as water, 
to move through while other substances require special transport 
proteins, channels, and often energy. The movement of water 
between fluid compartments happens by osmosis, which is simply 
the movement of water through a selectively permeable membrane 
from an area where it is highly concentrated to an area where it 
is not so concentrated. Water is never transported actively; that is, 
it never takes energy for water to move between compartments. 
Although cells do not directly control water movement, they do 
control movement of electrolytes and other solutes and thus 
indirectly regulate water movement by controlling where there will 
be regions of high and low concentrations. 
Cells maintain their water volume at a constant level, but the 
composition of solutes in a cell is in a continuous state of flux. 
This is because cells are bringing nutrients in, metabolizing them, 
and disposing of waste products. To maintain water balance a cell 
controls the movement of electrolytes to keep the total number of 
dissolved particles, called osmolality the same inside and outside 
(Figure 3.3 “Osmoregulation”). The total number of dissolved 
substances is the same inside and outside a cell, but the 
composition of the fluids differs between compartments. For 
example, sodium exists in extracellular fluid at fourteen times the 
concentration as compared to that inside a cell. 
Figure 3.3 Osmoregulation 
Overview of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance  |  153


“Osmosis” by 
Mariana 
Ruiz  / 
Public 
Domain 
Cells maintain water volume by actively controlling electrolyte 
concentrations. Human erythrocytes (red blood cells) are shown 
here. Three conditions are shown: hypertonic conditions (where 
the erythrocytes contract and appear “spiky”), isotonic conditions 
(where the erythrocytes appear normal) and hypotonic conditions 
(where the etrythrocytes expand and become more round). 
If a cell is placed in a solution that contains fewer dissolved 
particles (hypotonic solution) than the cell itself, water moves into 
the more concentrated cell, causing it to swell. Alternatively, if a 
cell is placed in a solution that is more concentrated (known as a 
hypertonic solution) water moves from inside the cell to the outside, 
causing it to shrink. Cells keep their water volume constant by 
pumping electrolytes in and out in an effort to balance the 
concentrations of dissolved particles on either side of their 
membranes. When a solution contains an equal concentration of 
dissolved particles on either side of the membrane, it is known as an 
isotonic solution. 
 
154  |  Overview of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=135 
 
Overview of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance  |  155


Image by 
NASA on 
unsplash.co
m / CC0 
Water’s Importance to 
Vitality 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
You get up in the morning, flush wastes down the toilet, take a 
shower, brush your teeth, drink, eat, drive, wash the grime from 
your windshield, get to work, and drink coffee. Next to a fountain 
you eat lunch and down it with a glass of water, you use the toilet 
again and again, drive home, prepare dinner, etc. Add all the ways 
you use water every day and you still will not come close to the 
countless uses water has in the human body. Of all the nutrients, 
water is the most critical as its absence proves lethal within a few 
days. Organisms have adapted numerous mechanisms for water 
conservation. Water uses in the human body can be loosely 
categorized into four basic functions: transportation vehicle, 
medium for chemical reactions, lubricant/shock absorber, and 
temperature regulator. 
156  |  Water’s Importance to Vitality


Water is the foundation of all life—the surface of the earth is 70 
percent water; the volume of water in humans is about 60 percent. 
Water As a Transportation Vehicle 
Water is called the “universal solvent” because more substances 
dissolve in it than any other fluid. Molecules dissolve in water 
because of the hydrogen and oxygen molecules ability to loosely 
bond with other molecules. Molecules of water (H2O) surround 
substances, suspending them in a sea of water molecules. The 
solvent action of water allows for substances to be more readily 
transported. A pile of undissolved salt would be difficult to move 
throughout tissues, as would a bubble of gas or a glob of fat. Blood, 
the primary transport fluid in the body is about 78 percent water. 
Dissolved substances in blood include proteins, lipoproteins, 
glucose, electrolytes, and metabolic waste products, such as carbon 
dioxide and urea. These substances are either dissolved in the 
watery surrounding of blood to be transported to cells to support 
basic functions or are removed from cells to prevent waste build-
up and toxicity. Blood is not just the primary vehicle of transport in 
the body, but also as a fluid tissue blood structurally supports blood 
vessels that would collapse in its absence. For example, the brain 
which consists of 75 percent water is used to provide structure. 
Water As a Medium for Chemical Reactions 
Water is required for even the most basic chemical reactions. 
Proteins fold into their functional shape based on how their amino-
acid sequences react with water. These newly formed enzymes 
must conduct their specific chemical reactions in a medium, which 
in all organisms is water. Water is an ideal medium for chemical 
Water’s Importance to Vitality  |  157


reactions as it can store a large amount of heat, is electrically 
neutral, and has a pH of 7.0, meaning it is not acidic or basic. 
Additionally, water is involved in many enzymatic reactions as an 
agent to break bonds or, by its removal from a molecule, to form 
bonds. 
Water As a Lubricant/Shock Absorber 
Many may view the slimy products of a sneeze as gross, but 
sneezing is essential for removing irritants and could not take place 
without water. Mucus, which is not only essential to discharge nasal 
irritants, is also required for breathing, transportation of nutrients 
along the gastrointestinal tract, and elimination of waste materials 
through the rectum. Mucus is composed of more than 90 percent 
water and a front-line defense against injury and foreign invaders. 
It protects tissues from irritants, entraps pathogens, and contains 
immune-system cells that destroy pathogens. Water is also the main 
component of the lubricating fluid between joints and eases the 
movement of articulated bones. 
The aqueous and vitreous humors, which are fluids that fill the 
extra space in the eyes and the cerebrospinal fluid surrounding 
the brain and spinal cord, are primarily water and buffer these 
organs against sudden changes in the environment. Watery fluids 
surrounding organs provide both chemical and mechanical 
protection. Just two weeks after fertilization water fills the amniotic 
sac in a pregnant woman providing a cushion of protection for the 
developing embryo. 
Water As a Temperature Regulator 
Another 
homeostatic 
function 
of 
the 
body, 
termed 
158  |  Water’s Importance to Vitality


thermoregulation is to balance heat gain with heat loss and body 
water plays an important role in accomplishing this. Human life 
is supported within a narrow range of temperature, with the 
temperature set point of the body being 98.6°F (37°C). Too low or 
too high of a temperature causes enzymes to stop functioning and 
metabolism is halted. At 82.4°F (28°C) muscle failure occurs and 
hypothermia sets in. At the opposite extreme of 111.2°F (44°C) the 
central nervous system fails and death results. Water is good at 
storing heat, an attribute referred to as heat capacity and thus helps 
maintain the temperature set point of the body despite changes in 
the surrounding environment. 
There are several mechanisms in place that move body water 
from place to place as a method to distribute heat in the body and 
equalize body temperature (Figure 3.4 “Thermoregulatory Center”). 
The hypothalamus in the brain is the thermoregulatory center. The 
hypothalamus contains special protein sensors that detect blood 
temperature. The skin also contains temperature sensors that 
respond quickly to changes in immediate surroundings. In response 
to cold sensors in the skin, a neural signal is sent to the 
hypothalamus, which then sends a signal to smooth muscle tissue 
surrounding blood vessels causing them to constrict and reduce 
blood flow. This reduces heat lost to the environment. The 
hypothalamus also sends signals to muscles to erect hairs and shiver 
and to endocrine glands like the thyroid to secrete hormones 
capable of ramping up metabolism. These actions increase heat 
conservation and stimulate its production in the body in response 
to cooling temperatures. 
Figure 3.4 Thermoregulatory Center 
Water’s Importance to Vitality  |  159


Thermoregul
ation is the 
ability of an 
organism to 
maintain 
body 
temperature 
despite 
changing 
environment
al 
temperatures
. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
160  |  Water’s Importance to Vitality


Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=139 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=139 
Water’s Importance to Vitality  |  161


Regulation of Water Balance 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
As you eat a bite of food, the salivary glands secrete saliva. As the 
food enters your stomach, gastric juice is secreted. As it enters the 
small intestine, pancreatic juice is secreted. Each of these fluids 
contains a great deal of water. How is that water replaced in these 
organs? What happens to the water now in the intestines? In a day, 
there is an exchange of about 10 liters of water among the body’s 
organs. The osmoregulation of this exchange involves complex 
communication between the brain, kidneys, and endocrine system. 
A homeostatic goal for a cell, a tissue, an organ, and an entire 
organism is to balance water output with water input. 
Regulation of Daily Water Input 
Total water output per day averages 2.5 liters. This must be balanced 
with water input. Our tissues produce around 300 milliliters of 
water per day through metabolic processes. The remainder of water 
output must be balanced by drinking fluids and eating solid foods. 
The average fluid consumption per day is 1.5 liters, and water gained 
from solid foods approximates 700 milliliters. 
Figure 3.5 Daily Fluid Loss and Gain 
162  |  Regulation of Water Balance


CO2 + H20 + 
ATP); sources 
of water loss: 
Skin and 
lungs 
(insensible 
water loss 
0.9 L/day), 
Urine 1.5 L/
day, Feces 0.1 
L/day. 
TOTAL 
intake 2.2 L/
day + 
Metabolic 
Production 
0.3 L/day – 
Output 
(0.9+1.5=0.1) 
L/day = 0 ” 
class=”wp-i
mage-141 
size-full” 
width=”629″ 
height=”777″
> Daily Fluid 
Loss and 
Gain 
 
Dietary Recommendations 
The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) has 
set the Adequate Intake (AI) for water for adult males at 3.7 liters 
(15.6 cups) and at 2.7 liters (11 cups) for adult females.1 These intakes 
1. Institute of Medicine Panel on Dietary Reference Intakes 
Regulation of Water Balance  |  163


are higher than the average intake of 2.2 liters. It is important to 
note that the AI for water includes water from all dietary sources; 
that is, water coming from food as well as beverages. People are 
not expected to consume 15.6 or 11 cups of pure water per day. 
In America, approximately 20 percent of dietary water comes from 
solid foods. See Table 3.1 “Water Content in Foods” for the range of 
water contents for selected food items. Beverages includes water, 
tea, coffee, sodas, and juices. 
Table 3.1 Water Content in Foods 
for Electrolytes and Water. (2005). Dietary Reference 
Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and 
Sulfate. The National Academies of Science, Engineering, 
and Medicine. Washington D.C. http://www.nap.edu/
openbook.php?record_id=10925&page=73. Accessed 
September 22, 2017. 
164  |  Regulation of Water Balance


Percentage Food Item 
90–99 
Nonfat milk, cantaloupe, strawberries, watermelon, lettuce, 
cabbage, celery, spinach, squash 
80–89 
Fruit juice, yogurt, apples, grapes, oranges, carrots, 
broccoli, pears, pineapple 
70–79 
Bananas, avocados, cottage cheese, ricotta cheese, baked 
potato, shrimp 
60–69 
Pasta, legumes, salmon, chicken breast 
50–59 
Ground beef, hot dogs, steak, feta cheese 
40–49 
Pizza 
30–39 
Cheddar cheese, bagels, bread 
20–29 
Pepperoni, cake, biscuits 
10–19 
Butter, margarine, raisins 
1–9 
Walnuts, dry-roasted peanuts, crackers, cereals, pretzels, 
peanut butter 
0 
Oils, sugars 
Source: National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 
23. US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl. Updated 2010. Accessed 
September 2017. 
There is some debate over the amount of water required to 
maintain health because there is no consistent scientific evidence 
proving that drinking a particular amount of water improves health 
or reduces the risk of disease. In fact, kidney-stone prevention 
seems 
to 
be 
the 
only 
premise 
for 
water-consumption 
recommendations. You may be surprised to find out that the 
commonly held belief that people need to drink eight 8-ounce 
glasses of water per day isn’t an official recommendation and isn’t 
based on any scientific evidence! The amount of water/fluids a 
person should consume every day is actually variable and should be 
based on the climate a person lives in, as well as their age, physical 
activity level, and kidney function. No maximum for water intake has 
been set. 
Regulation of Water Balance  |  165


Thirst Mechanism: Why Do We Drink? 
Thirst is an osmoregulatory mechanism to increase water input. 
The thirst mechanism is activated in response to changes in water 
volume in the blood, but is even more sensitive to changes in blood 
osmolality. Blood osmolality is primarily driven by the concentration 
of sodium cations. The urge to drink results from a complex 
interplay of hormones and neuronal responses that coordinate to 
increase water input and contribute toward fluid balance and 
composition in the body. The “thirst center” is contained within 
the hypothalamus, a portion of the brain that lies just above the 
brainstem. In older people the thirst mechanism is not as responsive 
and as we age there is a higher risk for dehydration. Thirst happens 
in the following sequence of physiological events: 
1. Receptor proteins in the kidney, heart, and hypothalamus 
detect decreased fluid volume or increased sodium 
concentration in the blood. 
2. Hormonal and neural messages are relayed to the brain’s thirst 
center in the hypothalamus. 
The hypothalamus sends neural signals to higher sensory areas 
in the cortex of the brain, stimulating the conscious thought to 
drink. 
3. Fluids are consumed. 
4. Receptors in the mouth and stomach detect mechanical 
movements involved with fluid ingestion. 
5. Neural signals are sent to the brain and the thirst mechanism 
is shut off. 
The physiological control of thirst is the backup mechanism to 
increase water input. Fluid intake is controlled primarily by 
conscious eating and drinking habits dependent on social and 
cultural influences. For example, you might have a habit of drinking 
a glass of orange juice and eating a bowl of cereal every morning 
before school or work. 
166  |  Regulation of Water Balance


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Figure 3.6 Regulating Water Intake 
Regulation of Daily Water Output 
As stated, daily water output averages 2.5 liters. There are two types 
of outputs. The first type is insensible water loss, meaning we are 
unaware of it. The body loses about 400 milliliters of its daily water 
output through exhalation. Another 500 milliliters is lost through 
our skin. The second type of output is sensible water loss, meaning 
we are aware of it. Urine accounts for about 1,500 milliliters of water 
output, and feces account for roughly 100 milliliters of water output. 
Regulating urine output is a primary function of the kidneys, and 
involves communication with the brain and endocrine system. 
Figure 3.7 Regulating Water Output 
Regulation of Water Balance  |  167


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
The Kidneys Detect Blood Volume 
The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs, each about the size of a 
fist and located on either side of the spine just below the rib cage. 
The kidneys filter about 190 liters of blood and produce (on average) 
1.5 liters of urine per day. Urine is mostly water, but it also contains 
electrolytes and waste products, such as urea. The amount of water 
filtered from the blood and excreted as urine is dependent on the 
amount of water in, and the electrolyte composition in the blood. 
Kidneys have protein sensors that detect blood volume from the 
pressure, or stretch, in the blood vessels of the kidneys. When blood 
volume is low, kidney cells detect decreased pressure and secrete 
the enzyme, renin. Renin travels in the blood and cleaves another 
protein into the active hormone, angiotensin. Angiotensin targets 
three different organs (the adrenal glands, the hypothalamus, and 
168  |  Regulation of Water Balance


the muscle tissue surrounding the arteries) to rapidly restore blood 
volume and, consequently, pressure. 
The Hypothalamus Detects Blood Osmolality 
Sodium and fluid balance are intertwined. Osmoreceptors 
(specialized protein receptors) in the hypothalamus detect sodium 
concentration in the blood. In response to a high sodium level, 
the hypothalamus activates the thirst mechanism and concurrently 
stimulates the release of antidiuretic hormone. Thus, it is not only 
kidneys that stimulate antidiuretic- hormone release, but also the 
hypothalamus. This dual control of antidiuretic hormone release 
allows for the body to respond to both decreased blood volume and 
increased blood osmolality. 
The Adrenal Glands Detect Blood Osmolality 
Cells in the adrenal glands sense when sodium levels are low and 
potassium levels are high in the blood. In response to either 
stimulus, they release aldosterone. Aldosterone is released in 
response to angiotensin stimulation and is controlled by blood 
electrolyte 
concentrations. 
In 
either 
case, 
aldosterone 
communicates the same message, to increase sodium reabsorption 
and consequently water reabsorption. In exchange, for the 
reabsorption of sodium and water, potassium is excreted. 
Regulation of Water Balance  |  169


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=144 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
170  |  Regulation of Water Balance


view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=144 
Regulation of Water Balance  |  171


Electrolytes Important for 
Fluid Balance 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Cells are about 75 percent water and blood plasma is about 95 
percent water. Why then, does the water not flow from blood 
plasma to cells? The force of water also known as hydrostatic 
pressure 
maintains 
the 
volumes 
of 
water 
between 
fluid 
compartments against the force of all dissolved substances. The 
concentration is the amount of particles in a set volume of water. 
(Recall that individual solutes can differ in concentration between 
the intracellular and extracellular fluids, but the total concentration 
of all dissolved substances is equal.) 
The force driving the water movement through the selectively 
permeable membrane is the higher solute concentration on the 
one side. Solutes at different concentrations on either side of a 
selectively permeable membrane exert a force, called osmotic 
pressure. The higher concentration of solutes on one side compared 
to the other of the U-tube exerts osmotic pressure, pulling the 
water to a higher volume on the side of the U-tube containing 
more dissolved particles. When the osmotic pressure is equal to the 
pressure of the water on the selectively permeable membrane, net 
water movement stops (though it still diffuses back and forth at an 
equal rate). 
One equation exemplifying equal concentrations but different 
volumes is the following 
5 grams of glucose in 1 liter = 10 grams of glucose in 2 liters (5g/L = 
5g/L) 
The differences in concentrations of particular substances 
provide concentration gradients that cells can use to perform work. 
A concentration gradient is a form of potential energy, like water 
172  |  Electrolytes Important for Fluid
Balance


above a dam. When water falls through a dam the potential energy 
is changed to moving energy (kinetic), that in turn is captured by 
turbines. Similarly, when an electrolyte at higher concentration in 
the extracellular fluid is transported into a cell, the potential energy 
is harnessed and used to perform work. 
Cells are constantly transporting nutrients in and wastes out. 
How is the concentration of solutes maintained if they are in a 
state of flux? This is where electrolytes come into play. The cell 
(or more specifically the numerous sodium-potassium pumps in 
its membrane) continuously pumps sodium ions out to establish 
a chemical gradient. The transport protein, called the glucose 
symporter, uses the sodium gradient to power glucose movement 
into the cell. Sodium and glucose both move into the cell. Water 
passively follows the sodium. To restore balance, the sodium-
potassium pump transfers sodium back to the extracellular fluid and 
water follows. Every cycle of the sodium-potassium pump involves 
the movement of three sodium ions out of a cell, in exchange for 
two potassium ions into a cell. To maintain charge neutrality on the 
outside of cells every sodium cation is followed by a chloride anion. 
Every cycle of the pump costs one molecule of ATP (adenosine 
triphosphate). The constant work of the sodium-potassium pump 
maintains the solute 
equilibrium 
and consequently, water 
distribution between intracellular and extracellular fluids. 
The unequal movement of the positively charged sodium and 
potassium ions makes intracellular fluid more negatively charged 
than the extracellular fluid. This charge gradient is another source 
of energy that a cell uses to perform work. You will soon learn 
that this charge gradient and the sodium-potassium pump are also 
essential for nerve conduction and muscle contraction. The many 
functions of the sodium-potassium pump in the body account for 
approximately a quarter of total resting energy expenditure. 
Figure 3.8 The Sodium-Potassium Pump 
Electrolytes Important for Fluid Balance  |  173


The 
sodium-pota
ssium pump 
is the 
primary 
mechanism 
for cells to 
maintain 
water 
balance 
between 
themselves 
and their 
surrounding 
environment
. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
174  |  Electrolytes Important for Fluid Balance


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=147 
 
Electrolytes Important for Fluid Balance  |  175


Sodium 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Sodium is vital not only for maintaining fluid balance but also for 
many other essential functions. In contrast to many minerals, 
sodium absorption in the small intestine is extremely efficient and 
in a healthy individual all excess sodium is excreted by the kidneys. 
In fact, very little sodium is required in the diet (about 200 
milligrams) because the kidneys actively reabsorb sodium. Kidney 
reabsorption of sodium is hormonally controlled, allowing for a 
relatively constant sodium concentration in the blood. 
Other Functions of Sodium in the Body 
The second notable function of sodium is in nerve impulse 
transmission. Nerve impulse transmission results from the 
transport of sodium cations into a nerve cell, which creates a charge 
difference (or voltage) between the nerve cell and its extracellular 
environment. Similar to how a current moves along a wire, a sodium 
current moves along a nerve cell. Stimulating a muscle contraction 
also involves the movement of sodium ions as well as other ion 
movements. 
Sodium is essential for nutrient absorption in the small intestine 
and also for nutrient reabsorption in the kidney. Amino acids, 
glucose and water must make their way from the small intestine to 
the blood. To do so, they pass through intestinal cells on their way 
to the blood. The transport of nutrients through intestinal cells is 
facilitated by the sodium-potassium pump, which by moving sodium 
out of the cell, creates a higher sodium concentration outside of the 
cell (requiring ATP). 
176  |  Sodium


Sodium Imbalances 
Sweating is a homeostatic mechanism for maintaining body 
temperature, which influences fluid and electrolyte balance. Sweat 
is mostly water but also contains some electrolytes, mostly sodium 
and chloride. Under normal environmental conditions (i.e., not hot, 
humid days) water and sodium loss through sweat is negligible, 
but is highly variable among individuals. It is estimated that sixty 
minutes of high-intensity physical activity, like playing a game of 
tennis, can produce approximately one liter of sweat; however the 
amount of sweat produced is highly dependent on environmental 
conditions. A liter of sweat typically contains between 1 and 2 grams 
of sodium and therefore exercising for multiple hours can result in a 
high amount of sodium loss in some people. Additionally, hard labor 
can produce substantial sodium loss through sweat. In either case, 
the lost sodium is easily replaced in the next snack or meal. 
In athletes hyponatremia, or a low blood-sodium level, is not 
so much the result of excessive sodium loss in sweat, but rather 
drinking too much water. The excess water dilutes the sodium 
concentration in blood. Illnesses causing vomiting, sweating, and 
diarrhea may also cause hyponatremia. The symptoms of 
hyponatremia, also called water intoxication (since it is often the 
root cause) include nausea, muscle cramps, confusion, dizziness, 
and in severe cases, coma and death. The physiological events that 
occur in water intoxication are the following: 
1. Excessive sodium loss and/or water intake. 
2. Sodium levels fall in blood and in the fluid between cells. 
3. Water moves to where solutes are more concentrated (i.e. into 
cells). 
4. Cells swell. 
5. Symptoms, including nausea, muscle cramps, confusion, 
dizziness, and in severe cases, coma and death result. 
Hyponatremia in endurance athletes (such as marathon runners) 
Sodium  |  177


can be avoided by drinking the correct amount of water, which is 
about 1 cup every twenty minutes during the event. Sports drinks 
are better at restoring fluid and blood-glucose levels than replacing 
electrolytes. During an endurance event you would be better off 
drinking water and eating an energy bar that contains sugars, 
proteins, and electrolytes. The American College of Sports Medicine 
suggests if you are exercising for longer than one hour you eat one 
high carbohydrate (25–40 grams) per hour of exercise along with 
ample water.1 
Watch out for the fat content, as sometimes energy bars contain 
a hefty dose. If you’re not exercising over an hour at high intensity, 
you can skip the sports drinks, but not the water. For those who do 
not exercise or do so at low to moderate intensity, sports drinks are 
another source of extra calories, sugar, and salt. 
Needs and Dietary Sources of Sodium 
The IOM has set an AI level for sodium for healthy adults between 
the ages of nineteen and fifty at 1,500 milligrams (Table 3.2 “Dietary 
Reference Intakes for Sodium”). Table salt is approximately 40 
percent sodium and 60 percent chloride. As a reference point, only 
⅔ teaspoon of salt is needed in the diet to meet the AI for sodium. 
The AI takes into account the amount of sodium lost in sweat during 
recommended physical activity levels and additionally provides for 
the sufficient intake of other nutrients, such as chloride. The 
1. Convertino VA, et al. (1996). American College of Sports 
Medicine Position Stand. Exercise and Fluid 
Replacement. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise, 28(1) i–vii. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9303999. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
178  |  Sodium


Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for sodium is 2,300 milligrams 
per day for adults. (Just over 1 teaspoon of salt contains the 2,300 
milligrams of sodium recommended). The UL is considered 
appropriate for healthy individuals but not those with hypertension 
(high blood pressure). The IOM estimates that greater than 95 
percent of men and 75 percent of women in America consume 
salt in excess of the UL. Many scientific studies demonstrate that 
reducing salt intake prevents hypertension, is helpful in reducing 
blood pressure after hypertension is diagnosed, and reduces the 
risk for cardiovascular disease. The IOM recommends that people 
over fifty, African Americans, diabetics, and those with chronic 
kidney disease should consume no more than 1,500 milligrams of 
sodium per day. The American Heart Association (AHA) states that 
all Americans, not just those listed, should consume less than 1,500 
milligrams of sodium per day to prevent cardiovascular disease. The 
AHA recommends this because millions of people have risk factors 
for hypertension and there is scientific evidence supporting that 
lower-sodium diets are preventive against hypertension. 
Table 3.2 Dietary Reference Intakes for Sodium 
Sodium  |  179


Age Group 
Adequate 
Intake(mg/day) 
Tolerable Upper Intake Level 
(mg/day) 
Infants (0–6 
months) 
120 
ND 
Infants (6–12 
months) 
370 
ND 
Children (1–3 
years) 
1,000 
1,500 
Children (4–8 
years) 
1,200 
1,900 
Children (9–13 
years) 
1,500 
2,200 
Adolescents (14–18 
years) 
1,500 
2,300 
Adults (19–50 
years) 
1,500 
2,300 
Adults (50–70 
years) 
1,300 
2,300 
Adults (> 70 years) 
1,200 
2,300 
ND = not 
determined 
Source: Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, 
Chloride, and Sulfate. Institute of Medicine. http://www.iom.edu/
Reports/2004/Dietary-Reference-Intakes-Water-Potassium-
Sodium-Chloride-and-Sulfate.aspx. Updated February 11, 2004. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Food Sources for Sodium 
Most sodium in the typical American diet comes from processed 
and prepared foods. Manufacturers add salt to foods to improve 
texture and flavor, and also as a preservative. The amount of salt 
in similar food products varies widely. Some foods, such as meat, 
poultry, and dairy foods, contain naturally-occurring sodium. For 
180  |  Sodium


“Food Eat 
Salt” by 
Clker-Free-V
ector-Images 
/ Pixabay 
License 
example, one cup of low-fat milk contains 107 milligrams of sodium. 
Naturally-occurring sodium accounts for less than 12 percent of 
dietary intake in a typical diet. For the sodium contents of various 
foods see Table 3.3 “Sodium Contents of Selected Foods”. 
Figure 3.9 Dietary Sources of Sodium 
 
Table 3.3 Sodium Contents of Selected Foods 
Sodium  |  181


Food Group 
Serving Size Sodium (mg) 
Breads, all types 
1 oz. 
95–210 
Rice Chex cereal 
1 ¼ c. 
292 
Raisin Bran cereal 
1 c. 
362 
Frozen pizza, plain, cheese 
4 oz. 
450–1200 
Frozen vegetables, all types 
½ c. 
2–160 
Salad dressing, regular fat, all types 2 Tbsp. 
110–505 
Salsa 
2 Tbsp. 
150–240 
Soup (tomato), reconstituted 
8 oz. 
700–1260 
Potato chips 
1 oz. (28.4 g) 120–180 
Tortilla chips 
1 oz. (28.4 g) 105–160 
Pork 
3 oz. 
59 
Chicken 
(½ breast) 
69 
Chicken fast food dinner 
2243 
Chicken noodle soup 
1 c. 
1107 
Dill pickle 
1 
928 
Soy sauce 
1 Tbsp. 
1029 
Canned corn 
1 c. 
384 
Baked beans, canned 
1 c. 
856 
Hot dog 
1 
639 
Burger, fast-food 
1 
990 
Steak 
3 oz. 
55 
Canned tuna 
3 oz. 
384 
Fresh tuna 
3 oz. 
50 
Dry-roasted peanuts 
1 c. 
986 
American cheese 
1 oz. 
406 
Tap water 
8 oz. 
12 
182  |  Sodium


Sodium 
levels in 
milligrams is 
a required 
listing on a 
Nutrition 
Facts label. 
Sodium on the Nutrition Facts Panel 
Figure 3.10 Nutrition Label 
Sodium  |  183


The Nutrition Facts panel displays the amount of sodium (in 
milligrams) per serving of the food in question (Figure 3.10 
“Nutrition Label” ). Food additives are often high in sodium, for 
example, monosodium glutamate (MSG) contains 12 percent 
sodium. Additionally, baking soda, baking powder, disodium 
phosphate, sodium alginate, and sodium nitrate or nitrite contain 
a significant proportion of sodium as well. When you see a food’s 
Nutrition Facts label, you can check the ingredients list to identify 
the source of the added sodium. Various claims about the sodium 
content in foods must be in accordance with Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) regulations (Table 3.4 “Food Packaging Claims 
Regarding Sodium”). 
Table 3.4 Food Packaging Claims Regarding Sodium 
Claim 
Meaning 
“Light in Sodium” or “Low in Sodium” 
Sodium is reduced by at 
least 50 percent 
“No Salt Added” or “Unsalted” 
No salt added during 
preparation and 
processing* 
“Lightly Salted” 
50 percent less sodium 
than that added to similar 
food 
“Sodium Free” or “Salt Free” 
Contains less than 5 mg 
sodium per serving 
“Very Low Salt” 
Contains less than 35 mg 
sodium per serving 
“Low Salt” 
Contains less than 140 mg 
sodium per serving 
*Must also declare on package “This is not a 
sodium-free food” if food is not sodium-free 
Source: Food Labeling Guide. US Food and Drug Administration. 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
GuidanceDocuments/FoodLabelingNutrition/FoodLabelingGuide/
ucm064911.htm. Updated October 2009. Accessed October 2, 2011. 
184  |  Sodium


Tools for Change 
To decrease your sodium intake, become a salt-savvy shopper by 
reading the labels and ingredients lists of processed foods and 
choosing those lower in salt. Even better, stay away from processed 
foods and control the seasoning of your foods. Eating a diet with less 
salty foods diminishes salt cravings so you may need to try a lower 
sodium diet for a week or two before you will be satisfied with the 
less salty food. 
Salt Substitutes 
For those with hypertension or those looking for a way to decrease 
salt use, using a salt substitute for food preparation is one option. 
However, many salt substitutes still contain sodium, just in lesser 
amounts than table salt. Also, remember that most salt in the diet is 
not from table-salt use, but from processed foods. Salt substitutes 
often replace the sodium with potassium. People with kidney 
disorders often have problems getting rid of excess potassium in the 
diet and are advised to avoid salt substitutes containing potassium. 
People with liver disorders should also avoid salt substitutes 
containing potassium because their treatment is often accompanied 
by potassium dysregulation. Table 3.5 “Salt Substitutes” displays the 
sodium and potassium amounts in some salt substitutes. 
Table 3.5 Salt Substitutes 
Sodium  |  185


Product 
Serving 
Size 
Sodium 
(mg) 
Potassium 
(mg) 
Salt 
1 tsp. 
2,300 
0 
Mrs. Dash 
1 tsp. 
0 
40 
Spike (Salt-Free) 
1 tsp. 
0 
96 
Veg-It 
1 tsp. 
<65 
<65 
Accent Low-Sodium 
Seasoning 
1 tsp. 
600 
0 
Salt Sense 
1 tsp. 
1,560 
0 
Pleasoning Mini-Mini Salt 
1 tsp. 
440 
0 
Morton Lite Salt 
1 tsp. 
1,100 
1,500 
Estee Salt-It 
1 tsp. 
0 
3,520 
Morton Nature’s Seasons 
1 tsp. 
1,300 
2,800 
Morton Salt Substitute 
1 tsp. 
0 
2,730 
No Salt 
1 tsp. 
5 
2,500 
Nu-Salt 
1 tsp. 
0 
529 
Source: Health Facts for You: Guidelines for a Low Sodium Diet. 
University 
of 
Wisconsin 
Hospitals 
and 
Clinics 
Authority. 
http://www.uhs.wisc.edu/health-topics/nutrition-fitness-and-
heart-health/documents/Sodium.pdf. 
Updated 
March 
2011. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Alternative Seasonings 
Table salt may seem an essential ingredient of good food, but there 
are others that provide alternative taste and zest to your foods. 
See Table 3.6 “Salt Alternatives” for an AHA list of alternative food 
seasonings. 
Table 3.6 Salt Alternatives 
186  |  Sodium


Seasoning 
Foods 
Allspice 
Lean ground meats, stews, tomatoes, peaches, applesauce, 
cranberry sauce, gravies, lean meat 
Almond 
extract 
Puddings, fruits 
Caraway 
seeds 
Lean meats, stews, soups, salads, breads, cabbage, 
asparagus, noodles 
Chives 
Salads, sauces, soups, lean-meat dishes, vegetables 
Cider 
vinegar 
Salads, vegetables, sauces 
Cinnamon 
Fruits, breads, pie crusts 
Curry 
powder 
Lean meats (especially lamb), veal, chicken, fish, tomatoes, 
tomato soup, mayonnaise, 
Dill 
fish sauces, soups, tomatoes, cabbages, carrots, 
cauliflower, green beans, cucumbers, potatoes, salads, 
macaroni, lamb 
Garlic (not 
garlic salt) 
Lean meats, fish, soups, salads, vegetables, tomatoes, 
potatoes 
Ginger 
Chicken, fruits 
Lemon 
juice 
Lean meats, fish, poultry, salads, vegetables 
Mace 
Hot breads, apples, fruit salads, carrots, cauliflower, 
squash, potatoes, veal, lamb 
Mustard 
(dry) 
lean ground meats, lean meats, chicken, fish, salads, 
asparagus, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, 
mayonnaise, sauces 
Nutmeg 
Fruits, pie crust, lemonade, potatoes, chicken, fish, lean 
meatloaf, toast, veal, pudding 
Onion 
powder 
Lean meats, stews, vegetables, salads, soups 
Paprika 
Lean meats, fish, soups, salads, sauces, vegetables 
Parsley 
Lean meats, fish, soups, salads, sauces, vegetables 
Peppermint 
extract 
Puddings, fruits 
Pimiento 
Salads, vegetables, casserole dishes 
Rosemary 
Chicken, veal, lean meatloaf, lean beef, lean pork, sauces, 
stuffings, potatoes, peas, lima beans 
Sodium  |  187


Sage 
Lean meats, stews, biscuits, tomatoes, green beans, fish, 
lima beans, onions, lean pork 
Savory 
Salads, lean pork, lean ground meats, soups, green beans, 
squash, tomatoes, lima beans, peas 
Thyme 
Lean meats (especially veal and lean pork), sauces, soups, 
onions, peas, tomatoes, salads 
Turmeric 
Lean meats, fish, sauces, rice 
Source: Shaking the Salt Habit. American Heart Association. 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/
HighBloodPressure/PreventionTreatmentofHighBloodPressure/
Shaking-the-Salt-Habit_UCM_303241_Article.jsp. Updated June 6, 
2012. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
188  |  Sodium


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=151 
 
Sodium  |  189


Chloride 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Chloride is the primary anion in extracellular fluid. In addition to 
passively following sodium, chloride has its own protein channels 
that reside in cell membranes. These protein channels are especially 
abundant in the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, and lungs. 
Chloride’s Role in Fluid Balance 
Chloride aids in fluid balance mainly because it follows sodium in 
order to maintain charge neutrality. Chloride channels also play a 
role in regulating fluid secretion, such as pancreatic juice into the 
small intestine and the flow of water into mucus. Fluid secretion and 
mucus are important for many of life’s processes. Their importance 
is exemplified in the signs and symptoms of the genetic disease, 
cystic fibrosis. 
Cystic Fibrosis 
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most prevalent inherited diseases 
in people of European descent. It is caused by a mutation in a 
protein that transports chloride ions out of the cell. CF’s signs and 
symptoms include salty skin, poor digestion and absorption (leading 
to poor growth), sticky mucus accumulation in the lungs (causing 
increased susceptibility to respiratory infections), liver damage, and 
infertility. 
190  |  Chloride


Other Functions of Chloride 
Chloride has several other functions in the body, most importantly 
in acid-base balance. Blood pH is maintained in a narrow range and 
the number of positively charged substances is equal to the number 
of negatively charged substances. Proteins, such as albumin, as well 
as bicarbonate ions and chloride ions, are negatively charged and 
aid in maintaining blood pH. Hydrochloric acid (a gastric acid 
composed of chlorine and hydrogen) aids in digestion and also 
prevents the growth of unwanted microbes in the stomach. 
Immune-system cells require chloride, and red blood cells use 
chloride anions to remove carbon dioxide from the body. 
Chloride Imbalances 
Low dietary intake of chloride and more often diarrhea can cause 
low blood levels of chloride. Symptoms typically are similar to those 
of hyponatremia and include weakness, nausea, and headache. 
Excess chloride in the blood is rare with no characteristic signs or 
symptoms. 
Needs and Dietary Sources of Chloride 
Most chloride in the diet comes from salt. (Salt is 60 percent 
chloride.) A teaspoon of salt equals 5,600 milligrams, with each 
teaspoon of salt containing 3,400 milligrams of chloride and 2,200 
milligrams of sodium. The chloride AI for adults, set by the IOM, is 
2,300 milligrams. Therefore just ⅔ teaspoon of table salt per day 
is sufficient for chloride as well as sodium. The AIs for other age 
groups are listed in Table 3.7 “Adequate Intakes for Chloride”. 
Table 3.7 Adequate Intakes for Chloride 
Chloride  |  191


Age Group 
mg/day 
Infants (0–6 months) 
180 
Infants (6–12 months) 
570 
Children (1–3 years) 
1,500 
Children (4–8 years) 
1,900 
Children (9–13 years) 
2,300 
Adolescents (14–18 years) 2,300 
Adults (19–50 years) 
2,300 
Adults (51–70 years) 
2,000 
Adults (> 70 years) 
1,800 
Source: Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, 
Chloride, and Sulfate. Institute of Medicine. http://www.iom.edu/
Reports/2004/Dietary-Reference-Intakes-Water-Potassium-
Sodium-Chloride-and-Sulfate.aspx. Updated February 11, 2004. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Other Dietary Sources of Chloride 
Chloride has dietary sources other than table salt, namely as 
another form of salt—potassium chloride. Dietary sources of 
chloride are: all foods containing sodium chloride, as well as 
tomatoes, lettuce, olives, celery, rye, whole-grain foods, and 
seafood. Although many salt substitutes are sodium-free, they may 
still contain chloride. 
Bioavailability 
Bioavailability refers to the amount of a particular nutrient in foods 
that is actually absorbed in the intestine and not eliminated in the 
192  |  Chloride


urine or feces. Simply put, the bioavailability of chloride is the 
amount that is on hand to perform its biological functions. In the 
small intestine, the elements of sodium chloride split into sodium 
cations and chloride anions. Chloride follows the sodium ion into 
intestinal cells passively, making chloride absorption quite efficient. 
When chloride exists as a potassium salt, it is also well absorbed. 
Other mineral salts, such as magnesium chloride, are not absorbed 
as well, but bioavailability still remains high. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
Chloride  |  193


view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=153 
 
194  |  Chloride


Potassium 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Potassium is the most abundant positively charged ion inside of 
cells. Ninety percent of potassium exists in intracellular fluid, with 
about 10 percent in extracellular fluid, and only 1 percent in blood 
plasma. As with sodium, potassium levels in the blood are strictly 
regulated. The hormone aldosterone is what primarily controls 
potassium levels, but other hormones (such as insulin) also play 
a role. When potassium levels in the blood increase, the adrenal 
glands release aldosterone. The aldosterone acts on the collecting 
ducts of kidneys, where it stimulates an increase in the number 
of sodium-potassium pumps. Sodium is then reabsorbed and more 
potassium is excreted. Because potassium is required for 
maintaining sodium levels, and hence fluid balance, about 200 
milligrams of potassium are lost from the body every day. 
Other Functions of Potassium in the Body 
Nerve impulse involves not only sodium, but also potassium. A nerve 
impulse moves along a nerve via the movement of sodium ions into 
the cell. To end the impulse, potassium ions rush out of the nerve 
cell, thereby decreasing the positive charge inside the nerve cell. 
This diminishes the stimulus. To restore the original concentrations 
of ions between the intracellular and extracellular fluid, the sodium-
potassium pump transfers sodium ions out in exchange for 
potassium 
ions 
in. 
On 
completion 
of 
the 
restored 
ion 
concentrations, a nerve cell is now ready to receive the next 
impulse. Similarly, in muscle cells potassium is involved in restoring 
the normal membrane potential and ending the muscle contraction. 
Potassium  |  195


Potassium also is involved in protein synthesis, energy metabolism, 
and platelet function, and acts as a buffer in blood, playing a role in 
acid-base balance. 
Imbalances of Potassium 
Insufficient potassium levels in the body (hypokalemia) can be 
caused by a low dietary intake of potassium or by high sodium 
intakes, but more commonly it results from medications that 
increase water excretion, mainly diuretics. The signs and symptoms 
of hypokalemia are related to the functions of potassium in nerve 
cells and consequently skeletal and smooth-muscle contraction. 
The signs and symptoms include muscle weakness and cramps, 
respiratory distress, and constipation. Severe potassium depletion 
can cause the heart to have abnormal contractions and can even 
be fatal. High levels of potassium in the blood, or hyperkalemia, 
also affects the heart. It is a silent condition as it often displays 
no signs or symptoms. Extremely high levels of potassium in the 
blood disrupt the electrical impulses that stimulate the heart and 
can cause the heart to stop. Hyperkalemia is usually the result of 
kidney dysfunction. 
Needs and Dietary Sources of Potassium 
The IOM based their AIs for potassium on the levels associated with 
a decrease in blood pressure, a reduction in salt sensitivity, and a 
minimal risk of kidney stones. For adult male and females above 
the age of nineteen, the adequate intake for potassium is 4,700 
grams per day. The AIs for other age groups are listed in Table 3.8 
“Adequate Intakes for Potassium”. 
Table 3.8 Adequate Intakes for Potassium 
196  |  Potassium


Age Group 
mg/day 
Infants (0–6 months) 
400 
Infants (6–12 months) 
700 
Children (1–3 years) 
3,000 
Children (4–8 years) 
3,800 
Children (9–13 years) 
4,500 
Adolescents (14–18 years) 
4,700 
Adults (> 19 years) 
4,700 
Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and 
Sulfate. Institute of Medicine. http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2004/
Dietary-Reference-Intakes-Water-Potassium-Sodium-Chloride-
and-Sulfate.aspx. Updated February 11, 2004. Accessed September 
22, 2017. 
Food Sources for Potassium 
Fruits and vegetables that contain high amounts of potassium are 
spinach, lettuce, broccoli, peas, tomatoes, potatoes, bananas, apples 
and apricots. Whole grains and seeds, certain fish (such as salmon, 
cod, and flounder), and meats are also high in potassium. The 
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH diet) emphasizes 
potassium-rich foods and will be discussed in greater detail in the 
next section. 
Bioavailability 
Greater than 90 percent of dietary potassium is absorbed in the 
small intestine. Although highly bioavailable, potassium is a very 
soluble mineral and easily lost during cooking and processing of 
Potassium  |  197


foods. Fresh and frozen foods are better sources of potassium than 
canned. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=155 
 
198  |  Potassium


Consequences of Deficiency 
or Excess 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
As with all nutrients, having too much or too little water has health 
consequences. Excessive water intake can dilute the levels of critical 
electrolytes in the blood. Water intoxication is rare, however when 
it does happen, it can be deadly. On the other hand, having too little 
water in the body is common. In fact, diarrhea-induced dehydration 
is the number-one cause of early-childhood death worldwide. In 
this section we will discuss subtle changes in electrolytes that 
compromise health on a chronic basis. 
High-Hydration Status: Water Intoxication/
Hyponatremia 
Water intoxication mainly affects athletes who overhydrate. Water 
intoxication is extremely rare, primarily because healthy kidneys 
are capable of excreting up to one liter of excess water per hour. 
Overhydration was unfortunately demonstrated in 2007 by Jennifer 
Strange, who drank six liters of water in three hours while 
competing in a “Hold Your Wee for a Wii” radio contest. Afterward 
she complained of a headache, vomited, and died. 
Low-Hydration Status: Dehydration 
Dehydration refers to water loss from the body without adequate 
Consequences of Deficiency or
Excess  |  199


replacement. It can result from either water loss or electrolyte 
imbalance, or, most commonly, both. Dehydration can be caused 
by prolonged physical activity without adequate water intake, heat 
exposure, excessive weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea, blood loss, 
infectious diseases, malnutrition, electrolyte imbalances, and very 
high glucose levels. Physiologically, dehydration decreases blood 
volume. The water in cells moves into the blood to compensate 
for the low blood-volume, and cells shrink. Signs and symptoms 
of dehydration include thirst, dizziness, fainting, headaches, low 
blood-pressure, fatigue, low to no urine output, and, in extreme 
cases, loss of consciousness and death. Signs and symptoms are 
usually noticeable after about 2 percent of total body water is lost. 
Chronic dehydration is linked to higher incidences of some 
diseases. There is strong evidence that low-hydration status 
increases the risk for kidney stones and exercise-induced asthma. 
There is also some scientific evidence that chronic dehydration 
increases the risk for kidney disease, heart disease, and the 
development of hyperglycemia in people with diabetes. Older 
people often suffer from chronic dehydration as their thirst 
mechanism is no longer as sensitive as it used to be. 
Heat Stroke 
Heat stroke is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the 
body temperature is greater than 104°F (40°C). It is the result of 
the body being unable to sufficiently cool itself by thermoregulatory 
mechanisms. Dehydration is a primary cause of heat stroke as there 
are not enough fluids in the body to maintain adequate sweat 
production, and cooling of the body is impaired. Signs and 
symptoms are dry skin (absence of sweating), dizziness, trouble 
breathing, rapid pulse, confusion, agitation, seizures, coma, and 
possibly death. Dehydration may be preceded by heat exhaustion, 
which is characterized by heavy sweating, rapid breathing, and fast 
200  |  Consequences of Deficiency or Excess


pulse. The elderly, infants, and athletes are the most at risk for heat 
stroke. 
Hypertension 
Blood pressure is the force of moving blood against arterial walls. 
It is reported as the systolic pressure over the diastolic pressure, 
which is the greatest and least pressure on an artery that occurs 
with each heartbeat. The force of blood against an artery is 
measured with a device called a sphygmomanometer. The results 
are recorded in millimeters of mercury, or mmHg. A desirable blood 
pressure is less than 120/80 mm Hg. Hypertension is the scientific 
term for high blood pressure and defined as a sustained blood 
pressure of 130/80 mm Hg or greater.1 
New ACC/AHA High Blood Pressure Guidelines Lower Definition of 
Hypertension. (n.d.). American College of Cardiology. Retrieved July 
2, 2020, from http%3a%2f%2fwww.acc.org%2flatest-in-
cardiology%2farticles%2f2017%2f11%2f08%2f11%2f47%2fmon-5pm-
bp-guideline-aha-2017 
Hypertension is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and 
reducing blood pressure has been found to decrease the risk of 
dying from a heart attack or stroke. The Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) reported that in 2007–2008 approximately 33 
percent of Americans were hypertensive.2The percentage of people 
with hypertension increases to over 60 percent in people over the 
age of sixty. 
1. 
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
“FastStats—Hypertension.” Accessed October 2, 2011. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/hyprtens.htm. 
Consequences of Deficiency or Excess  |  201


Testing a GIs 
blood 
pressure at 
Guantanamo 
by Charlie 
Helmholt / 
Public 
Domain 
Figure 3.11 Measuring Blood Pressure 
There has been much debate about the role sodium plays in 
hypertension. In the latter 1980s and early 1990s the largest 
epidemiological study evaluating the relationship of dietary sodium 
202  |  Consequences of Deficiency or Excess


intake with blood pressure, called INTERSALT, was completed and 
then went through further analyses.34 
More than ten thousand men and women from thirty-two 
countries participated in the study. The study concluded that a 
higher sodium intake is linked to an increase in blood pressure. 
A more recent study, involving over twelve thousand US citizens, 
concluded that a higher sodium-to-potassium intake is linked to 
higher cardiovascular mortality and all-causes mortality.5 
The DASH-Sodium trial was a clinical trial which evaluated the 
effects of a specified eating plan with or without reduced sodium 
intake. The DASH diet is an eating plan that is low in saturated 
fat, cholesterol, and total fat. Fruits, vegetables, low-fat dairy foods, 
3. Intersalt Cooperative Research Group. (1988). Intersalt: 
An International Study of Electrolyte Excretion and 
Blood Pressure. Results for 24 Hour Urinary Sodium and 
Potassium Excretion. British Medical Journal, 297(6644), 
319–28. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1834069/. Accessed September 20, 2017. 
4. Elliott P, Stamler J, et al. (1996). Intersalt Revisited: 
Further Analyses of 24 Hour Sodium Excretion and Blood 
Pressure within and across Populations. British Medical 
Journal, 312(7041), 1249–53. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8634612. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
5. Yang Q, Liu T, et al. (2011). Sodium and Potassium Intake 
and Mortality among US Adults: Prospective Data from 
the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey. Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(13), 1183–91. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21747015. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Consequences of Deficiency or Excess  |  203


whole-grain foods, fish, poultry, and nuts are emphasized while red 
meats, sweets, and sugar-containing beverages are mostly avoided. 
In this study, people on the low-sodium (1500 milligrams per day) 
DASH diet had mean systolic blood pressures that were 7.1 mmHg 
lower than people without hypertension not on the DASH diet. 
The effect on blood pressure was greatest in participants with 
hypertension at the beginning of the study who followed the DASH 
diet. Their systolic blood pressures were, on average, 11.5 mmHg 
lower than participants with hypertension on the control diet.6 
Following the DASH diet not only reduces sodium intake, but 
also increases potassium, calcium, and magnesium intake. All of 
these electrolytes have a positive effect on blood pressure, although 
the mechanisms by which they reduce blood pressure are largely 
unknown. 
While some other large studies have demonstrated little or no 
significant relationship between sodium intake and blood pressure, 
the weight of scientific evidence demonstrating low-sodium diets 
as 
effective 
preventative 
and 
treatment 
measures 
against 
hypertension led the US government to pass a focus on salt within 
the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2008. A part of this act 
tasked the CDC, under guidance from the IOM, to make 
recommendations for Americans to reduce dietary sodium intake. 
This task is ongoing and involves “studying government approaches 
(regulatory and legislative actions), food supply approaches (new 
6. Sacks, FM, Svetkey LP, et al. (2001). Effects on Blood 
Pressure of Reduced Dietary Sodium and the Dietary 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) Diet. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 344(1), 3–10. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11136953. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
204  |  Consequences of Deficiency or Excess


product development, food reformulation), and information/
education strategies for the public and professionals.”7 
Try for Yourself 
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has 
prepared an informative fact sheet on the DASH diet: 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/hbp/
dash/new_dash.pdf. 
Use the food-group charts to help design a daily menu that 
follows the DASH eating plan. 
7. Henney JE, Taylor CL, Boon CS. (2010). Strategies to 
Reduce Sodium Intake in the United States, by 
Committee on Strategies to Reduce Sodium Intake, 
Institute of Medicine. Washington, D.C.: National 
Academies Press. http://www.nap.edu/
openbook.php?record_id=12818&page= 
19#p2001bcf59960019001. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Consequences of Deficiency or Excess  |  205


“Your 
Guide to 
Lowering 
Blood 
Pressure”. 
US 
Departmen
t of Health 
Services 
Salt Sensitivity 
High dietary intake of sodium is one risk factor for hypertension 
and contributes to high blood pressure in many people. However, 
studies have shown that not everyone’s blood pressure is affected 
by lowering sodium intake. About 10 to 20 percent of the population 
is considered to be salt-sensitive, meaning their blood pressure is 
affected by salt intake. Genetics, race, gender, weight, and physical 
206  |  Consequences of Deficiency or Excess


activity level are determinants of salt sensitivity. African Americans, 
women, and overweight individuals are more salt-sensitive than 
others. Also, if hypertension runs in a person’s family, that person 
is more likely to be salt-sensitive. Because reducing dietary salt 
intake will not work for everyone with hypertension or a risk for 
developing the condition, there are many opponents of reducing 
dietary salt intake at the national level. Among such opponents is 
the Salt Institute, a nonprofit trade organization that states, “No 
evidence demonstrates that current salt intake levels lead to worse 
health outcomes such as more heart attacks or higher 
cardiovascular mortality.”8 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
8. Salt and Health. The Salt Institute. 
http://www.saltinstitute.org/Issues-in-focus/Food-
salt-health. Updated 2011. Accessed October 2, 2011. 
Consequences of Deficiency or Excess  |  207


recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=159 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=159 
208  |  Consequences of Deficiency or Excess


Water Concerns 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
At this point you have learned how critical water is to support 
human life, how it is distributed and moved in the body, how fluid 
balance and composition is maintained, and the recommended 
amount of fluids a person should consume daily. In America you 
have a choice of thousands of different beverages. Which should 
you choose to receive the most health benefit and achieve your 
recommended fluid intake? 
Reading the Label 
Most beverages marketed in the United States have a Nutrition 
Facts panel and ingredients list, but some, such as coffee (for home 
consumption), beer, and wine, do not. As with foods, beverages that 
are nutrient-dense are the better choices, with the exception of 
plain water, which contains few to no other nutrients. Beverages 
do not make you full; they satiate your thirst. Therefore, the fewer 
calories in a beverage the better it is for avoiding weight gain. For an 
estimate of kilocalories in various beverages see Table 3.9 “Calories 
in Various Beverages”. 
Table 3.9 Calories in Various Beverages 
Water Concerns  |  209


Beverage 
Serving Size (oz) Kilocalories 
Soda 
12.0 
124–189 
Bottled sweet tea 
12.0 
129–143 
Orange juice 
12.0 
157–168 
Tomato/vegetable juice 12.0 
80 
Whole milk 
12.0 
220 
Nonfat milk 
12.0 
125 
Soy milk 
12.0 
147–191 
Coffee, black 
12.0 
0–4 
Coffee, with cream 
12.0 
39–43 
Caffe latte, whole milk 
12.0 
200 
Sports drink 
12.0 
94 
Beer 
12.0 
153 
White wine 
5.0 
122 
Beverage Consumption in the United States 
According to the Beverage Marketing Corporation, in the United 
States in 2010 Americans consumed 29,325 millions of gallons of 
refreshment beverages including soft drinks, coffee, tea, sports 
drinks, energy drinks, fruit drinks, and bottled water.1 
As in the past, carbonated soft drinks remained the largest 
category of consumed beverages. In recent decades total caloric 
1. US Liquid Refreshment Beverage Market Increased by 
1.2% in 2010, Beverage Marketing Corporation Reports. 
Beverage Marketing Corporation. 
http://www.beveragemarketing.com/?section=pressrel
eases. Published 2010. Accessed March 17, 2011. 
210  |  Water Concerns


consumption has increased in the United States and is largely 
attributed to increased consumption of snacks and caloric 
beverages. People between the ages of nineteen and thirty-nine 
obtain 10 percent of their total energy intake from soft drinks.2 
In all age groups the consumption of total beverages provides, on 
average, 21 percent of daily caloric intake. This is 7 percent higher 
than the IOM acceptable caloric intake from beverages. Moreover, 
the high intakes of soft drinks and sugary beverages displace the 
intake of more nutrient-dense beverages, such as low-fat milk. 
Scientific studies have demonstrated that while all beverages are 
capable of satisfying thirst they do not make you feel full, or 
satiated. This means that drinking a calorie-containing beverage 
with a meal only provides more calories, as it won’t be offset by 
eating less food. The Beverage Panel of the University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill has taken on the challenge of scientifically 
evaluating the health benefits and risks of beverage groups and 
providing recommendations for beverage groups (Table 3.10 
“Recommendations of the Beverage Panel”). In regards to soft drinks 
and fruit drinks, The Beverage Panel states that they increase 
energy intake, are not satiating, and that there is little if any 
reduction in other foods to compensate for the excess calories. All 
of these factors contribute to increased energy intake and obesity.3 
2. Beverage Intake in the United States. The Beverage 
Panel, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/beverage. Accessed 
October 2, 2011. (See Figure 6.8 "Percentage of Daily 
Caloric Intake from Beverage Groups".) 
3. US Liquid Refreshment Beverage Market Increased by 
1.2% in 2010, Beverage Marketing Corporation 
Reports.Beverage Marketing Corporation. 
Water Concerns  |  211


The Beverage Panel recommends an even lower intake of calories 
from beverages than IOM—10 percent or less of total caloric intake. 
Table 3.10 Recommendations of the Beverage Panel 
Beverage 
Servings per day* 
Water 
≥ 4 (women), ≥ 6 (men) 
Unsweetened coffee and tea 
≤ 8 for tea, ≤ 4 for coffee 
Nonfat and low-fat milk; fortified soy drinks ≤ 2 
Diet beverages with sugar substitutes 
≤ 4 
100 percent fruit juices, whole milk, sports 
drinks 
≤ 1 
Calorie-rich beverages without nutrients 
≤ 1, less if trying to lose 
weight 
*One serving is eight ounces. 
Source: Beverage Panel Recommendations and Analysis. University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. US Beverage Guidance Council. 
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/nutrans/policy/beverage/us-
beverage-panel. Accessed November 6, 2012. 
Sources of Drinking Water 
The Beverage Panel recommends that women drink at least 32 
ounces and men drink at least 48 ounces of water daily. In 1974, the 
US federal government enacted The Safe Drinking Water Act with 
the intention of providing the American public with safe drinking 
water. This act requires the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
to set water-quality standards and assure that the 150,000-plus 
http://www.beveragemarketing.com/?section=pressrel
eases. Accessed March 17, 2011. 
212  |  Water Concerns


Deadly 
water-borne 
illnesses 
decreased to 
almost 
nonexistent 
levels in the 
United 
States after 
the 
implementat
ion of water 
disinfection 
methods. 
public water systems in the country adhere to the standards. About 
15 percent of Americans obtain drinking water from private wells, 
which are not subject to EPA standards. 
Producing water safe for drinking involves some or all of the 
following processes: screening out large objects, removing excess 
calcium carbonate from hard water sources, flocculation, which 
adds a precipitating agent to remove solid particles, clarification, 
sedimentation, filtration, and disinfection. These processes aim to 
remove unhealthy substances and produce high-quality, colorless, 
odorless, good-tasting water. 
Most drinking water is disinfected by the process of chlorination, 
which involves adding chlorine compounds to the water. 
Chlorination is cheap and effective at killing bacteria. However, it is 
less effective at removing protozoa, such as Giardia lamblia. 
Chlorine-resistant protozoa and viruses are instead removed by 
extensive filtration methods. In the decades immediately following 
the implementation of water chlorination and disinfection methods 
in this country, waterborne illnesses, such as cholera and typhoid 
fever, essentially disappeared in the United States (Figure 3.12 
“Deadly Water-borne Illnesses In United States”). In fact, the 
treatment of drinking water is touted as one of the top public-
health achievements of the last century. 
Figure 3.12 Deadly Water-borne Illnesses In United States 
Water Concerns  |  213


Source: Image credit Robert Tauxe. 
Drinking Water Week. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
http://www.cdc.gov/features/drinkingwater/graph.html. Updated 
May 17, 2012. Aceessed September 22, 2017. 
Chlorine reaction with inadequately filtered water can result in 
the formation of potentially harmful substances. Some of these 
chlorinated compounds, when present at extremely high levels, 
have been shown to cause cancer in studies conducted in rodents. 
In addition to many other contaminants, the EPA has set maximum 
contaminant levels (legal threshold limits) for these chlorinated 
compounds in water, in order to guard against disease risk. The 
oversight of public water systems in this country is not perfect 
and water-borne illnesses are significantly underreported; however, 
there are far fewer cases of water-borne illnesses than those 
attributed to food-borne illnesses that have occurred in the recent 
past. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
214  |  Water Concerns


 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=162 
 
Water Concerns  |  215


Popular Beverage Choices 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Caffeine 
Caffeine is a chemical called xanthine found in the seeds, leaves, 
and fruit of many plants, where it acts as a natural pesticide. It is 
the most widely consumed psychoactive substance and is such an 
important part of many people’s lives that they might not even think 
of it as a drug. Up to 90 percent of adults around the world use it on 
a daily basis. According to both the FDA and the American Medical 
Association the moderate use of caffeine is “generally recognized as 
safe.” It is considered a legal psychoactive drug and, for the most 
part, is completely unregulated. 
Typical Doses and Dietary Sources 
What is a “moderate intake” of caffeine? Caffeine intakes are 
described in the following manner: 
• Low–moderate intake. 130–300 milligrams per day 
• Moderate intake. 200–300 milligrams per day 
• High intake. 400 or more milligrams per day 
The average caffeine consumption for American adults is 
considered moderate at 280 milligrams per day, although it is not 
uncommon for people to consume up to 600 milligrams per day. 
This works out to almost 4 ½ cups of coffee per day. The bitter 
taste of caffeine is palatable for many and coffee is the most readily 
216  |  Popular Beverage Choices


available source of it, accounting for 70 percent of daily caffeine 
consumption. The second readily available source of caffeine is soft 
drinks, delivering 16 percent of daily caffeine. (In this case, the bitter 
caffeine taste is usually masked by a large amount of added sugar.) 
Tea is the third common source of caffeine, at 12 percent. 
Just how much caffeine is there in a cup of coffee? It varies. The 
caffeine content of an average cup of coffee can range from 102 to 
200 milligrams, and the range for tea is 40 to 120 milligrams. Table 
3.11 “Caffeine Content in Various Beverages and Foods” provides 
useful information on the levels of caffeine found in common 
beverages. When estimating your total caffeine consumption 
remember it’s not only in beverages, but also some foods and 
medicine. 
Table 3.11 Caffeine Content in Various Beverages and Foods 
Beverage/Food 
Milligrams 
Starbucks Grande Coffee (16 oz.) 
380 
Plain brewed coffee (8 oz.) 
102–200 
Espresso (1 oz.) 
30–90 
Plain, decaffeinated coffee (8 oz.) 3–12 
Tea, brewed (8 oz.) 
40–120 
Green tea (8 oz.) 
25–40 
Coca-Cola Classic (12 oz.) 
35 
Dr. Pepper (12 oz.) 
44 
Jolt Cola (12 oz.) 
72 
Mountain Dew (12 oz.) 
54 
Mountain Dew, MDX (12 oz.) 
71 
Pepsi-Cola (12 oz.) 
38 
Red Bull (8.5 oz.) 
80 
Full Throttle (16 oz.) 
144 
Monster Energy (16 oz.) 
160 
Spike Shooter (8.4 oz.) 
300 
Popular Beverage Choices  |  217


Source: Caffeine.MedicineNet.com. http://www.medicinenet.com/
caffeine/article.htm. Accessed October 2, 2011. 
Health Benefits 
The most renowned effects of caffeine on the body are increased 
alertness and delay of fatigue and sleep. How does caffeine 
stimulate the brain? Caffeine is chemically similar to a chemical in 
our brains (adenosine). Caffeine interacts with adenosine’s specific 
protein receptor. It blocks the actions of the adenosine, and affects 
the levels of signaling molecules in the brain, leading to an increase 
in energy metabolism. At the molecular level, caffeine stimulates the 
brain, increasing alertness and causing a delay of fatigue and sleep. 
At high doses caffeine stimulates the motor cortex of the brain and 
interferes with the sleep-wake cycle, causing side effects such as 
shakiness, anxiety, and insomnia. People’s sensitivity to the adverse 
effects of caffeine varies and some people develop side effects at 
much lower doses. The many effects caffeine has on the brain do 
not diminish with habitual drinking of caffeinated beverages. 
Tools for Change 
Consuming caffeine in the evening and in the middle of the night 
will help keep you awake to study for an exam, but it will not 
enhance your performance on the next day’s test if you do not get 
enough sleep. Drink caffeinated beverages in moderation at any 
time of the day or evening to increase alertness (if you are not 
sensitive to caffeine’s adverse effects), but get the recommended 
amount of sleep. 
It is important to note that caffeine has some effects on health 
that are either promoted or masked by the other beneficial 
218  |  Popular Beverage Choices


Photo by 
Jeremy 
Ricketts on 
unsplash.co
m / CC0 
chemicals found in coffee and tea. This means that when assessing 
the benefits and consequences of your caffeine intake, you must 
take into account how much caffeine in your diet comes from coffee 
and tea versus how much you obtain from soft drinks. 
There is scientific evidence supporting that higher consumption of 
caffeine, mostly in the form of coffee, substantially reduces the risk 
for developing Type 2 diabetes and Parkinson’s disease. There is a 
lesser amount of evidence suggesting increased coffee consumption 
lowers the risk of heart attacks in both men and women, and strokes 
in women. In smaller population studies, decaffeinated coffee 
sometimes performs as well as caffeinated coffee, bringing up the 
hypothesis that there are beneficial chemicals in coffee other than 
caffeine that play larger roles in the health benefits of coffee. A 
review of fifteen epidemiological studies in The Journal of the 
American Medical Association proposes that habitual coffee 
consumption reduces the risk of Type 2 diabetes.1 The risk 
1. van Dam R M, Hu FB. (2005). Coffee Consumption and 
Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review. Journal of 
Popular Beverage Choices  |  219


reduction was 35 percent for those who consumed greater than 6–7 
cups of coffee per day and was 28 percent for those who consumed 
4–5 cups daily. These groups were compared with people who 
consumed less than 2 cups of coffee per day. 
Parkinson’s disease is an illness of the central nervous system 
causing many disorders of movement. Research scientists in Hawai‘i 
found an inverse relationship between caffeine intake and the 
incidence of Parkinson’s disease. Men who did not consume coffee 
had a five times more likely chance of Parkinson’s disease than men 
who consumed more than 3 cups of coffee daily.2 
In this study other caffeine sources, such as soft drinks and tea, 
were also associated with a reduced risk of Parkinson’s disease. A 
review of several studies, published in the Journal of Alzheimer’s 
Disease, has reaffirmed that caffeine intake may reduce the risk of 
Parkinson’s disease in both men and women.3 This review also took 
into consideration caffeine obtained from dietary sources other 
the American Medical Association, 294(1), 97–104. 
http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-
abstract/201177. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
2. Ross GW, et al. (2000). Association of Coffee and Caffeine 
Intake with the Risk of Parkinson’s Disease. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 283(20), 2674–79. 
http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/
192731. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
3. Costa J, et al. (2010). Caffeine Exposure and the Risk of 
Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis of Observational Studies. Journal of 
Alzheimer's disease, 20, S221–38. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20182023. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
220  |  Popular Beverage Choices


than caffeine, though the data on these is not as extensive or as 
strong as for coffee. There is also some scientific evidence that 
drinking coffee is linked to a much lower risk for dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease.4 
Health Consequences 
The acute adverse health effects of caffeine ingestion are anxiety, 
shakiness, and sleep deprivation. On a more chronic basis, some 
scientific reports suggest that higher caffeine intake is linked to 
negative effects on heart health and increased cardiovascular 
disease; although at this point most data suggests caffeine does 
not significantly increase either. A comprehensive review published 
in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition reports that caffeine 
induces a modest increase in blood pressure lasting less than three 
hours in people with hypertension, but there is no evidence that 
habitual coffee consumption increases blood pressure long-term or 
increases the risk for cardiovascular disease.5 
4. Patil H, Lavie CJ, O’Keefe JH . (2011). Cuppa Joe: Friend or 
Foe? Effects of Chronic Coffee Consumption on 
Cardiovascular and Brain Health. Missouri Medical, 
108(6), 431–8. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
22338737. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
5. Mesas AE, et al. (2011). The Effect of Coffee on Blood 
Pressure and Cardiovascular Disease in Hypertensive 
Individuals: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 94(4), 1113–26. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21880846. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Popular Beverage Choices  |  221


There is no good evidence that chronic caffeine exposure 
increases 
blood 
pressure 
chronically 
in 
people 
without 
hypertension. 
Some have hypothesized that caffeine elevates calcium excretion 
and therefore could potentially harm bones. The scientific 
consensus at this time is that caffeine minimally affects calcium 
levels and intake is not associated with any increased risk for 
osteoporosis or the incidence of fractures in most women. Although 
the effect of caffeine on calcium excretion is small, postmenopausal 
women with risk factors for osteoporosis may want to make sure 
their dietary caffeine intake is low or moderate and not excessive. 
The Caffeine Myth 
A diuretic refers to any substance that elevates the normal urine 
output above that of drinking water. Caffeinated beverages are 
commonly believed to be dehydrating due to their diuretic effect, 
but results from scientific studies do not support that caffeinated 
beverages increase urine output more so than water. This does not 
mean that consuming caffeinated beverages does not affect urine 
output, but rather that it does not increase urine output more than 
water does. Thus, caffeinated beverages are considered a source of 
hydration similar to water. 
Sports Drinks 
Scientific 
studies 
under 
certain 
circumstances 
show 
that 
consuming sports drinks (instead of plain water) during high-
intensity exercise lasting longer than one hour significantly 
enhances endurance, and some evidence indicates it additionally 
enhances performance. There is no consistent evidence that 
222  |  Popular Beverage Choices


drinking sports drinks instead of plain water enhances endurance 
or performance in individuals exercising less than one hour and at 
low to moderate intensities. A well-concocted sports drink contains 
sugar, water, and sodium in the correct proportions so that 
hydration is optimized. The sugar is helpful in maintaining blood-
glucose levels needed to fuel muscles, the water keeps an athlete 
hydrated, and the sodium enhances fluid absorption and replaces 
some of that lost in sweat. The American College of Sports Medicine 
states that the goal of drinking fluids during exercise is to prevent 
dehydration, which compromises performance and endurance. 
The primary source of water loss during intense physical activity 
is sweat. Perspiration rates are variable and dependent on many 
factors including body composition, humidity, temperature, and 
type of exercise. The hydration goal for obtaining optimal 
endurance and performance is to replace what is lost, not to over-
hydrate. A person’s sweating rate can be approximated by 
measuring weight before and after exercise—the difference in 
weight will be the amount of water weight you lost. 
The primary electrolyte lost in sweat is sodium. One liter of sweat 
can contain between 1,000–2,000 milligrams of sodium. Potassium, 
magnesium, and calcium are also lost, but in much lower amounts. If 
you are exercising at high intensity for greater than ninety minutes, 
it is important to replace sodium as well as water. This can be partly 
accomplished by consuming a sports drink. The highest content of 
sodium in commercial sports drinks is approximately 450 milligrams 
per liter and thus will not replace all lost sodium unless a person 
drinks several liters. This is NOT recommended, as water 
intoxication not only compromises performance, but may also be 
deadly. The sodium in sports drinks enhances fluid absorption so 
that rehydration is more efficiently accomplished. If you are not 
exercising for more than ninety minutes at a high intensity, dietary 
intake of sodium and other electrolytes should be sufficient for 
replacing lost electrolytes. 
Popular Beverage Choices  |  223


Who Needs Sports Drinks? 
Children and adult athletes exercising for more than one hour at 
high-intensity (tennis, rowing, rugby, soccer, etc.) may benefit 
endurance-wise and possibly performance-wise from consuming a 
sports drink rather than water. However, consuming sports drinks 
provides no benefit over water to endurance, performance, or 
exercise recovery for those exercising less than an hour. In fact, as 
with all other sugary drinks containing few to no nutrients, they are 
only another source of calories. Drinking sports drinks when you 
are doing no exercise at all is not recommended. 
Sports Drink Alternatives 
Instead of a sports drink, you can replenish lost fluids and obtain 
energy and electrolytes during exercise by drinking plain water and 
eating a sports bar or snack that contains carbohydrates, protein, 
and electrolytes. Post-exercise, low-fat milk has been scientifically 
shown to be just as effective as a sports drink as a rehydration 
beverage and it is more nutrient-dense, containing carbohydrates, 
protein, and electrolytes, in addition to other vitamins. 
The Bottom Line 
Sports drinks consumed in excess by athletes or used by non-
athletes simply are another source of added sugars, and thus extra 
calories, in the diet and provide no performance, exercise recovery 
or health benefit. 
224  |  Popular Beverage Choices


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=165 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
Popular Beverage Choices  |  225


view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=165 
226  |  Popular Beverage Choices


PART IV 
CHAPTER 4. 
CARBOHYDRATES 
Chapter 4. Carbohydrates  |  227




Two 
Breadfruit by 
Michael 
Coghlan / 
CC BY-SA 2.0 
Introduction 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
E ʻai i ka mea i loaʻa 
What you have, eat 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to: 
Introduction  |  229


• 
Describe the different types of simple and complex 
carbohydrates 
• 
Describe the process of carbohydrate digestion and 
absorption 
• 
Describe the functions of carbohydrates in the 
body 
• 
Describe the body’s carbohydrate needs and how 
personal choices can lead to health benefits or 
consequences 
Throughout history, carbohydrates have and continue to be a major 
source of people’s diets worldwide. In ancient Hawai‘i the Hawaiians 
obtained the majority of their calories from carbohydrate rich plants 
like the ‘uala (sweet potato), ulu (breadfruit) and kalo (taro). For 
example, mashed kalo or poi was a staple to meals for Hawaiians. 
Research suggests that almost 78 percent of the diet was made up 
of these fiber rich carbohydrate foods.1 
Carbohydrates are the perfect nutrient to meet your body’s 
nutritional needs. They nourish your brain and nervous system, 
provide energy to all of your cells when within proper caloric limits, 
and help keep your body fit and lean. Specifically, digestible 
carbohydrates provide bulk in foods, vitamins, and minerals, while 
1. Fujita R, Braun KL, Hughes CK. (2004). The traditional 
Hawaiian diet: a review of the literature. Pacific Health 
Dialogue, 11(2). http://pacifichealthdialog.org.fj/
Volume2011/no2/
PHD1120220p2162022120Yamada20orig.pdf. Accessed 
October 19, 2017. 
230  |  Introduction


Carbohydrat
es are broken 
down into 
the 
subgroups 
simple and 
complex 
carbohydrate
s. These 
subgroups 
are further 
categorized 
into mono-, 
di-, and 
polysacchari
des. 
indigestible carbohydrates provide a good amount of fiber with a 
host of other health benefits. 
Plants synthesize the fast-releasing carbohydrate, glucose, from 
carbon dioxide in the air and water, and by harnessing the sun’s 
energy. Recall that plants convert the energy in sunlight to chemical 
energy in the molecule, glucose. Plants use glucose to make other 
larger, more slow-releasing carbohydrates. When we eat plants we 
harvest the energy of glucose to support life’s processes. 
Figure 4.1 Carbohydrate Classification Scheme 
Carbohydrates are a group of organic compounds containing a ratio 
of one carbon atom to two hydrogen atoms to one oxygen atom. 
Basically, they are hydrated carbons. The word “carbo” means 
carbon and “hydrate” means water. Glucose, the most abundant 
carbohydrate in the human body, has six carbon atoms, twelve 
hydrogen atoms, and six oxygen atoms. The chemical formula for 
glucose is written as C6H12O6. Synonymous with the term 
carbohydrate is the Greek word “saccharide,” which means sugar. 
The simplest unit of a carbohydrate is a monosaccharide. 
Carbohydrates are broadly classified into two subgroups, simple 
(“fast-releasing”) 
and 
complex 
(“slow-releasing”). 
Simple 
Introduction  |  231


carbohydrates are further grouped into the monosaccharides and 
disaccharides. 
Complex 
carbohydrates 
are 
long 
chains 
of 
monosaccharides. 
Simple/Fast-Releasing Carbohydrates 
Simple carbohydrates are also known more simply as “sugars” and 
are 
grouped 
as 
either 
monosaccharides 
or 
disaccharides. 
Monosaccharides include glucose, fructose, and galactose, and the 
disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and sucrose. 
Simple carbohydrates stimulate the sweetness taste sensation, 
which is the most sensitive of all taste sensations. Even extremely 
low concentrations of sugars in foods will stimulate the sweetness 
taste 
sensation. 
Sweetness 
varies 
between 
the 
different 
carbohydrate types—some are much sweeter than others. Fructose 
is the top naturally-occurring sugar in sweetness value. 
Monosaccharides 
For all organisms from bacteria to plants to animals, glucose is the 
preferred fuel source. The brain is completely dependent on glucose 
as its energy source (except during extreme starvation conditions). 
The monosaccharide galactose differs from glucose only in that a 
hydroxyl (−OH) group faces in a different direction on the number 
four carbon (Figure 4.2 “Structures of the Three Most Common 
Monosaccharides: Glucose, Galactose, and Fructose”). This small 
structural alteration causes galactose to be less stable than glucose. 
As a result, the liver rapidly converts it to glucose. Most absorbed 
galactose is utilized for energy production in cells after its 
conversion to glucose. (Galactose is one of two simple sugars that 
232  |  Introduction


Circles 
indicate the 
structural 
differences 
between the 
three. 
are bound together to make up the sugar found in milk. It is later 
freed during the digestion process.) 
Fructose also has the same chemical formula as glucose but 
differs in its chemical structure. The fructose ring contains 4 
carbons while the glucose ring contains 5 carbons. Fructose, in 
contrast to glucose, is not an energy source for other cells in the 
body. Mostly found in fruits, honey, and sugarcane, fructose is one 
of the most common monosaccharides in nature. It is also found 
in soft drinks, cereals, and other products sweetened with high 
fructose corn syrup. 
Figure 
4.2 
Structures 
of 
the 
Three 
Most 
Common 
Monosaccharides: Glucose, Galactose, and Fructose 
Pentoses are less common monosaccharides which have only five 
carbons and not six. The pentoses are abundant in the nucleic acids 
RNA and DNA, and also as components of fiber. 
Lastly, there are the sugar alcohols, which are industrially 
synthesized derivatives of monosaccharides. Some examples of 
sugar alcohols are sorbitol, xylitol, and glycerol. (Xylitol is similar 
in sweetness as table sugar). Sugar alcohols are often used in place 
of table sugar to sweeten foods as they are incompletely digested 
and absorbed, and therefore less caloric. The bacteria in your mouth 
opposes them, hence sugar alcohols do not cause tooth decay. 
Interestingly, the sensation of “coolness” that occurs when chewing 
gum that contains sugar alcohols comes from them dissolving in the 
mouth, a chemical reaction that requires heat from the inside of the 
mouth. 
Introduction  |  233


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Disaccharides 
Disaccharides are composed of pairs of two monosaccharides linked 
together. Disaccharides include sucrose, lactose, and maltose. All of 
the disaccharides contain at least one glucose molecule. 
Sucrose, which contains both glucose and fructose molecules, 
is otherwise known as table sugar. Sucrose is also found in many 
fruits and vegetables, and at high concentrations in sugar beets 
and sugarcane, which are used to make table sugar. Lactose, which 
is commonly known as milk sugar, is composed of one glucose 
unit and one galactose unit. Lactose is prevalent in dairy products 
such as milk, yogurt, and cheese. Maltose consists of two glucose 
molecules bonded together. It is a common breakdown product of 
plant starches and is rarely found in foods as a disaccharide. 
Figure 4.3 The Most Common Disaccharides 
234  |  Introduction


Complex/Slow-Releasing Carbohydrates 
Complex carbohydrates are polysaccharides, long chains of 
monosaccharides that may be branched or not branched. There are 
two main groups of polysaccharides: starches and fibers. 
Starches 
Starch molecules are found in abundance in grains, legumes, and 
root vegetables, such as potatoes. Amylose, a plant starch, is a linear 
chain containing hundreds of glucose units. Amylopectin, another 
plant starch, is a branched chain containing thousands of glucose 
units. These large starch molecules form crystals and are the 
energy-storing molecules of plants. These two starch molecules 
(amylose and amylopectin) are contained together in foods, but the 
smaller one, amylose, is less abundant. Eating raw foods containing 
starches provides very little energy as the digestive system has a 
hard time breaking them down. Cooking breaks down the crystal 
structure of starches, making them much easier to break down 
in the human body. The starches that remain intact throughout 
digestion are called resistant starches. Bacteria in the gut can break 
some of these down and may benefit gastrointestinal health. 
Isolated and modified starches are used widely in the food industry 
and during cooking as food thickeners. 
Figure 4.4 Structures of the Plant Starches and Glycogen 
Introduction  |  235


Humans and animals store glucose energy from starches in the 
form of the very large molecule, glycogen. It has many branches that 
allow it to break down quickly when energy is needed by cells in the 
body. It is predominantly found in liver and muscle tissue in animals. 
Dietary Fibers 
Dietary fibers are polysaccharides that are highly branched and 
cross-linked. Some dietary fibers are pectin, gums, cellulose, 
hemicellulose, and lignin. Lignin, however, is not composed of 
carbohydrate units. Humans do not produce the enzymes that can 
break down dietary fiber; however, bacteria in the large intestine 
(colon) do. Dietary fibers are very beneficial to our health. The 
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee states that there is enough 
scientific evidence to support that diets high in fiber reduce the 
risk for obesity and diabetes, which are primary risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease.2 
2. US Department of Agriculture. Part D. Section 5: 
Carbohydrates. In Report of the DGAC on the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, 2010. 
http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/
236  |  Introduction


Dietary fiber is categorized as either water-soluble or insoluble. 
Some examples of soluble fibers are inulin, pectin, and guar gum 
and they are found in peas, beans, oats, barley, and rye. Cellulose 
and lignin are insoluble fibers and a few dietary sources of them 
are whole-grain foods, flax, cauliflower, and avocados. Cellulose is 
the most abundant fiber in plants, making up the cell walls and 
providing structure. Soluble fibers are more easily accessible to 
bacterial enzymes in the large intestine so they can be broken down 
to a greater extent than insoluble fibers, but even some breakdown 
of cellulose and other insoluble fibers occurs. 
The last class of fiber is functional fiber. Functional fibers have 
been added to foods and have been shown to provide health 
benefits to humans. Functional fibers may be extracted from plants 
and purified or synthetically made. An example of a functional fiber 
is psyllium-seed husk. Scientific studies show that consuming 
psyllium-seed husk reduces blood-cholesterol levels and this health 
claim has been approved by the FDA. Total dietary fiber intake is the 
sum of dietary fiber and functional fiber consumed. 
Figure 4.5 Dietary Fiber 
DietaryGuidelines/2010/DGAC/Report/
D-5-Carbohydrates.pdf. Accessed September 30, 2011. 
Introduction  |  237


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
238  |  Introduction


recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=175 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=175 
Introduction  |  239


Digestion and Absorption of 
Carbohydrates 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
From the Mouth to the Stomach 
The mechanical and chemical digestion of carbohydrates begins 
in the mouth. Chewing, also known as mastication, crumbles the 
carbohydrate foods into smaller and smaller pieces. The salivary 
glands in the oral cavity secrete saliva that coats the food particles. 
Saliva contains the enzyme, salivary amylase. This enzyme breaks 
the bonds between the monomeric sugar units of disaccharides, 
oligosaccharides, and starches. The salivary amylase breaks down 
amylose and amylopectin into smaller chains of glucose, called 
dextrins and maltose. The increased concentration of maltose in the 
mouth that results from the mechanical and chemical breakdown 
of starches in whole grains is what enhances their sweetness. Only 
about five percent of starches are broken down in the mouth. (This 
is a good thing as more glucose in the mouth would lead to more 
tooth decay.) When carbohydrates reach the stomach no further 
chemical breakdown occurs because the amylase enzyme does not 
function in the acidic conditions of the stomach. But mechanical 
breakdown is ongoing—the strong peristaltic contractions of the 
stomach mix the carbohydrates into the more uniform mixture of 
chyme. 
Figure 4.6 Salivary Glands in the Mouth 
240  |  Digestion and Absorption of
Carbohydrates


Salivary 
glands 
secrete 
salivary 
amylase, 
which begins 
the chemical 
breakdown 
of 
carbohydrate
s by breaking 
the bonds 
between 
monomeric 
sugar units. 
From the Stomach to the Small Intestine 
The chyme is gradually expelled into the upper part of the small 
intestine. Upon entry of the chyme into the small intestine, the 
pancreas releases pancreatic juice through a duct. This pancreatic 
juice contains the enzyme, pancreatic amylase, which starts again 
the breakdown of dextrins into shorter and shorter carbohydrate 
chains. Additionally, enzymes are secreted by the intestinal cells 
that line the villi. These enzymes, known collectively as 
disaccharidase, are sucrase, maltase, and lactase. Sucrase breaks 
sucrose into glucose and fructose molecules. Maltase breaks the 
bond between the two glucose units of maltose, and lactase breaks 
the bond between galactose and glucose. Once carbohydrates are 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  241


chemically broken down into single sugar units they are then 
transported into the inside of intestinal cells. 
When people do not have enough of the enzyme lactase, lactose is 
not sufficiently broken down resulting in a condition called lactose 
intolerance. The undigested lactose moves to the large intestine 
where bacteria are able to digest it. The bacterial digestion of 
lactose produces gases leading to symptoms of diarrhea, bloating, 
and abdominal cramps. Lactose intolerance usually occurs in adults 
and is associated with race. The National Digestive Diseases 
Information Clearing House states that African Americans, Hispanic 
Americans, American Indians, and Asian Americans have much 
higher incidences of lactose intolerance while those of northern 
European descent have the least.1 Most people with lactose 
intolerance can tolerate some amount of dairy products in their 
diet. The severity of the symptoms depends on how much lactose is 
consumed and the degree of lactase deficiency. 
Absorption: Going to the Blood Stream 
The cells in the small intestine have membranes that contain many 
transport proteins in order to get the monosaccharides and other 
nutrients into the blood where they can be distributed to the rest of 
the body. The first organ to receive glucose, fructose, and galactose 
is the liver. The liver takes them up and converts galactose to 
glucose, breaks fructose into even smaller carbon-containing units, 
1. Lactose Intolerance. National Digestive Diseases 
Information Clearing House. 
http://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/
lactoseintolerance/. Updated April 23, 2012. Accessed 
September 22, 2017. 
242  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


Carbohydrat
e digestion 
begins in the 
mouth and is 
most 
extensive in 
the small 
intestine. 
The resultant 
monosacchar
ides are 
absorbed 
into the 
bloodstream 
and 
transported 
to the liver. 
and either stores glucose as glycogen or exports it back to the 
blood. How much glucose the liver exports to the blood is under 
hormonal control and you will soon discover that even the glucose 
itself regulates its concentrations in the blood. 
Figure 4.7 Carbohydrate Digestion 
Maintaining Blood Glucose Levels: The Pancreas 
and Liver 
Glucose levels in the blood are tightly controlled, as having either 
too much or too little glucose in the blood can have health 
consequences. Glucose regulates its levels in the blood via a process 
called negative feedback. An everyday example of negative feedback 
is in your oven because it contains a thermostat. When you set 
the temperature to cook a delicious homemade noodle casserole 
at 375°F the thermostat senses the temperature and sends an 
electrical signal to turn the elements on and heat up the oven. 
When the temperature reaches 375°F the thermostat senses the 
temperature and sends a signal to turn the element off. Similarly, 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  243


your body senses blood glucose levels and maintains the glucose 
“temperature” in the target range. The glucose thermostat is located 
within the cells of the pancreas. After eating a meal containing 
carbohydrates glucose levels rise in the blood. 
Insulin-secreting cells in the pancreas sense the increase in blood 
glucose and release the hormone, insulin, into the blood. Insulin 
sends a signal to the body’s cells to remove glucose from the blood 
by transporting it into different organ cells around the body and 
using it to make energy. In the case of muscle tissue and the liver, 
insulin sends the biological message to store glucose away as 
glycogen. The presence of insulin in the blood signifies to the body 
that glucose is available for fuel. As glucose is transported into the 
cells around the body, the blood glucose levels decrease. Insulin has 
an opposing hormone called glucagon. Glucagon-secreting cells in 
the pancreas sense the drop in glucose and, in response, release 
glucagon into the blood. Glucagon communicates to the cells in the 
body to stop using all the glucose. More specifically, it signals the 
liver to break down glycogen and release the stored glucose into the 
blood, so that glucose levels stay within the target range and all cells 
get the needed fuel to function properly. 
Figure 4.8 The Regulation of Glucose 
244  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Leftover Carbohydrates: The Large Intestine 
Almost all of the carbohydrates, except for dietary fiber and 
resistant starches, are efficiently digested and absorbed into the 
body. Some of the remaining indigestible carbohydrates are broken 
down by enzymes released by bacteria in the large intestine. The 
products 
of 
bacterial 
digestion 
of 
these 
slow-releasing 
carbohydrates are short-chain fatty acids and some gases. The 
short-chain fatty acids are either used by the bacteria to make 
energy and grow, are eliminated in the feces, or are absorbed into 
cells of the colon, with a small amount being transported to the 
liver. Colonic cells use the short-chain fatty acids to support some 
of their functions. The liver can also metabolize the short-chain 
fatty acids into cellular energy. The yield of energy from dietary 
fiber is about 2 kilocalories per gram for humans, but is highly 
dependent upon the fiber type, with soluble fibers and resistant 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  245


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
starches yielding more energy than insoluble fibers. Since dietary 
fiber is digested much less in the gastrointestinal tract than other 
carbohydrate types (simple sugars, many starches) the rise in blood 
glucose after eating them is less, and slower. These physiological 
attributes of high-fiber foods (i.e. whole grains) are linked to a 
decrease in weight gain and reduced risk of chronic diseases, such 
as Type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 
Figure 4.9 Overview of Carbohydrate Digestion 
A Carbohydrate Feast 
You are at a your grandma’s house for family dinner and you just 
consumed kalua pig, white rice, sweet potatoes, mac salad, chicken 
long rice and a hot sweet bread roll dripping with butter. Less 
than an hour later you top it off with a slice of haupia pie and 
then lie down on the couch to watch TV. The “hormone of plenty,” 
insulin, answers the nutrient call. Insulin sends out the physiological 
message that glucose is abundant in the blood, so that cells can 
absorb it and either use it or store it. The result of this hormone 
246  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
message is maximization of glycogen stores and all the excess 
glucose, protein, and lipids are stored as fat. 
A typical American Thanksgiving meal contains many foods that are 
dense in carbohydrates, with the majority of those being simple 
sugars and starches. These types of carbohydrate foods are rapidly 
digested and absorbed. Blood glucose levels rise quickly causing a 
spike in insulin levels. Contrastingly, foods containing high amounts 
of fiber are like time-release capsules of sugar. A measurement 
of the effects of a carbohydrate-containing food on blood-glucose 
levels is called the glycemic response. 
Glycemic Index 
The glycemic responses of various foods have been measured and 
then ranked in comparison to a reference food, usually a slice of 
white bread or just straight glucose, to create a numeric value called 
the glycemic index (GI). Foods that have a low GI do not raise blood-
glucose levels neither as much nor as fast as foods that have a 
higher GI. A diet of low-GI foods has been shown in epidemiological 
and clinical trial studies to increase weight loss and reduce the risk 
of obesity, Type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.2 
2. Brand-Miller J, et al. (2009).  Dietary Glycemic Index: 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  247


Table 4.1 The Glycemic Index: Foods In Comparison To Glucose 
Health Implications. Journal of the American College of 
Nutrition, 28(4), 
446S–49S.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
20234031. Accessed September 27, 2017. 
248  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


Foods 
GI Value 
Low GI Foods (< 55) 
Apple, raw 
36 
Orange, raw 
43 
Banana, raw 
51 
Mango, raw 
51 
Carrots, boiled 
39 
Taro, boiled 
53 
Corn tortilla 
46 
Spaghetti (whole wheat) 
37 
Baked beans 
48 
Soy milk 
34 
Skim milk 
37 
Whole milk 
39 
Yogurt, fruit 
41 
Yogurt, plain 
14 
Icecream 
51 
Medium GI Foods (56–69) 
Pineapple, raw 
59 
Cantaloupe 
65 
Mashed potatoes 
70 
Whole-wheat bread 
69 
Brown rice 
55 
Cheese pizza 
60 
Sweet potato, boiled 
63 
Macaroni and cheese 
64 
Popcorn 
65 
High GI Foods (70 and higher) 
Banana (over-ripe) 
82 
Corn chips 
72 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  249


Pretzels 
83 
White bread 
70 
White rice 
72 
Bagel 
72 
Rice milk 
86 
Cheerios 
74 
Raisin Bran 
73 
Fruit roll-up 
99 
Gatorade 
78 
For 
the 
Glycemic 
Index 
on 
different 
foods, 
visit 
http://www.mendosa.com/gilists.htm. 
The type of carbohydrate within a food affects the GI along with 
its fat and fiber content. Increased fat and fiber in foods increases 
the time required for digestion and delays the rate of gastric 
emptying into the small intestine which, ultimately reduces the GI. 
Processing and cooking also affects a food’s GI by increasing their 
digestibility. Advancements in the technologies of food processing 
and the high consumer demand for convenient, precooked foods in 
the United States has created foods that are digested and absorbed 
more rapidly, independent of the fiber content. Modern breakfast 
cereals, breads, pastas, and many prepared foods have a high GI. 
In contrast, most raw foods have a lower GI. (However, the more 
ripened a fruit or vegetable is, the higher its GI.) 
The GI can be used as a guide for choosing healthier carbohydrate 
choices but has some limitations. The first is GI does not take into 
account the amount of carbohydrates in a portion of food, only the 
type of carbohydrate. Another is that combining low- and high-GI 
foods changes the GI for the meal. Also, some nutrient-dense foods 
have higher GIs than less nutritious food. (For instance, oatmeal has 
a higher GI than chocolate because the fat content of chocolate is 
higher.) Lastly, meats and fats do not have a GI since they do not 
contain carbohydrates. 
250  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


More Resources 
Visit this online database to discover the glycemic indices 
of foods. Foods are listed by category and also by low, 
medium, or high glycemic index. 
http://www.gilisting.com/ 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates  |  251


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=182 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=182 
252  |  Digestion and Absorption of Carbohydrates


The Functions of 
Carbohydrates in the Body 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
There are five primary functions of carbohydrates in the human 
body. They are energy production, energy storage, building 
macromolecules, sparing protein, and assisting in lipid metabolism. 
Energy Production 
The primary role of carbohydrates is to supply energy to all cells 
in the body. Many cells prefer glucose as a source of energy versus 
other compounds like fatty acids. Some cells, such as red blood 
cells, are only able to produce cellular energy from glucose. The 
brain is also highly sensitive to low blood-glucose levels because 
it uses only glucose to produce energy and function (unless under 
extreme starvation conditions). About 70 percent of the glucose 
entering the body from digestion is redistributed (by the liver) back 
into the blood for use by other tissues. Cells that require energy 
remove the glucose from the blood with a transport protein in their 
membranes. The energy from glucose comes from the chemical 
bonds between the carbon atoms. Sunlight energy was required to 
produce these high-energy bonds in the process of photosynthesis. 
Cells in our bodies break these bonds and capture the energy to 
perform cellular respiration. Cellular respiration is basically a 
controlled burning of glucose versus an uncontrolled burning. A cell 
uses many chemical reactions in multiple enzymatic steps to slow 
the release of energy (no explosion) and more efficiently capture the 
energy held within the chemical bonds in glucose. 
The Functions of Carbohydrates in
the Body  |  253


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
The first stage in the breakdown of glucose is called glycolysis. 
Glycolysis, or the splitting of glucose, occurs in an intricate series 
of ten enzymatic-reaction steps. The second stage of glucose 
breakdown occurs in the energy factory organelles, called 
mitochondria. One carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are 
removed, yielding more energy. The energy from these carbon 
bonds is carried to another area of the mitochondria, making the 
cellular energy available in a form cells can use. 
Figure 4.10 Cellular Respiration 
 
Cellular respiration is the process by which energy is captured from 
glucose. 
Energy Storage 
If the body already has enough energy to support its functions, the 
excess glucose is stored as glycogen (the majority of which is stored 
in the muscles and liver). A molecule of glycogen may contain in 
254  |  The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body


excess of fifty thousand single glucose units and is highly branched, 
allowing for the rapid dissemination of glucose when it is needed to 
make cellular energy. 
The amount of glycogen in the body at any one time is equivalent 
to about 4,000 kilocalories—3,000 in muscle tissue and 1,000 in the 
liver. Prolonged muscle use (such as exercise for longer than a few 
hours) can deplete the glycogen energy reserve. Remember that this 
is referred to as “hitting the wall” or “bonking” and is characterized 
by fatigue and a decrease in exercise performance. The weakening 
of muscles sets in because it takes longer to transform the chemical 
energy in fatty acids and proteins to usable energy than glucose. 
After prolonged exercise, glycogen is gone and muscles must rely 
more on lipids and proteins as an energy source. Athletes can 
increase their glycogen reserve modestly by reducing training 
intensity and increasing their carbohydrate intake to between 60 
and 70 percent of total calories three to five days prior to an event. 
People who are not hardcore training and choose to run a 
5-kilometer race for fun do not need to consume a big plate of 
pasta prior to a race since without long-term intense training the 
adaptation of increased muscle glycogen will not happen. 
The liver, like muscle, can store glucose energy as a glycogen, 
but in contrast to muscle tissue it will sacrifice its stored glucose 
energy to other tissues in the body when blood glucose is low. 
Approximately one-quarter of total body glycogen content is in the 
liver (which is equivalent to about a four-hour supply of glucose) 
but this is highly dependent on activity level. The liver uses this 
glycogen reserve as a way to keep blood-glucose levels within a 
narrow range between meal times. When the liver’s glycogen supply 
is exhausted, glucose is made from amino acids obtained from the 
destruction of proteins in order to maintain metabolic homeostasis. 
The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body  |  255


The sugar 
molecule 
deoxyribose 
is used to 
build the 
backbone of 
DNA. Image 
by rozeta / 
CC BY-SA 
3.0 
Building Macromolecules 
Although most absorbed glucose is used to make energy, some 
glucose is converted to ribose and deoxyribose, which are essential 
building blocks of important macromolecules, such as RNA, DNA, 
and ATP. Glucose is additionally utilized to make the molecule 
NADPH, which is important for protection against oxidative stress 
and is used in many other chemical reactions in the body. If all of the 
energy, glycogen-storing capacity, and building needs of the body 
are met, excess glucose can be used to make fat. This is why a diet 
too high in carbohydrates and calories can add on the fat pounds—a 
topic that will be discussed shortly. 
Figure 4.11 Chemical Structure of Deoxyribose 
Figure 4.12 Double-stranded DNA 
256  |  The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body


Image by 
Forluvoft / 
Public 
Domain 
Sparing Protein 
In a situation where there is not enough glucose to meet the body’s 
needs, glucose is synthesized from amino acids. Because there is 
no storage molecule of amino acids, this process requires the 
destruction of proteins, primarily from muscle tissue. The presence 
of adequate glucose basically spares the breakdown of proteins 
from being used to make glucose needed by the body. 
Lipid Metabolism 
As blood-glucose levels rise, the use of lipids as an energy source is 
The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body  |  257


inhibited. Thus, glucose additionally has a “fat-sparing” effect. This 
is because an increase in blood glucose stimulates release of the 
hormone insulin, which tells cells to use glucose (instead of lipids) to 
make energy. Adequate glucose levels in the blood also prevent the 
development of ketosis. Ketosis is a metabolic condition resulting 
from an elevation of ketone bodies in the blood. Ketone bodies are 
an alternative energy source that cells can use when glucose supply 
is insufficient, such as during fasting. Ketone bodies are acidic and 
high elevations in the blood can cause it to become too acidic. This 
is rare in healthy adults, but can occur in alcoholics, people who 
are malnourished, and in individuals who have Type 1 diabetes. The 
minimum amount of carbohydrate in the diet required to inhibit 
ketosis in adults is 50 grams per day. 
Carbohydrates 
are 
critical 
to 
support 
life’s 
most 
basic 
function—the production of energy. Without energy none of the 
other life processes are performed. Although our bodies can 
synthesize glucose it comes at the cost of protein destruction. As 
with all nutrients though, carbohydrates are to be consumed in 
moderation as having too much or too little in the diet may lead to 
health problems. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
258  |  The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body


Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=187 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=187 
The Functions of Carbohydrates in the Body  |  259


Image by 
Forluvoft / 
Public 
Domain 
Health Consequences and 
Benefits of 
High-Carbohydrate Diets 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Can America blame its obesity epidemic on the higher consumption 
of added sugars and refined grains? This is a hotly debated topic 
by both the scientific community and the general public. In this 
section, we will give a brief overview of the scientific evidence. 
Added Sugars 
Figure 4.13 Sugar Consumption (In Teaspoons) From Various 
Sources 
 
260  |  Health Consequences and
Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) 
defines added sugars as “sugars and syrups that are added to foods 
during processing or preparation.” The IOM goes on to state, “Major 
sources of added sugars include soft drinks, sports drinks, cakes, 
cookies, pies, fruitades, fruit punch, dairy desserts, and candy.” 
Processed foods, even microwaveable dinners, also contain added 
sugars. Added sugars do not include sugars that occur naturally 
in whole foods (such as an apple), but do include natural sugars 
such as brown sugar, corn syrup, dextrose, fructose, fruit juice 
concentrates, maple syrup, sucrose, and raw sugar that are then 
added to create other foods (such as cookies). Results from a survey 
of forty-two thousand Americans reports that in 2008 the average 
intake of added sugars is 15 percent of total calories, a drop from 18 
percent of total calories in 2000.1 
This is still above the recommended intake of less than 10 percent 
of total calories. The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) reports 
that sugar consumption in the American diet in 2008 was, on 
average, 28 teaspoons per day (Figure 4.13 “Sugar Consumption (in 
Teaspoons) from Various Sources”). 
Obesity, Diabetes, and Heart Disease and Their 
Hypothesized Link to Excessive Sugar and 
Refined Carbohydrate Consumption 
To understand the magnitude of the health problem in the United 
1. Welsh JA, Sharma AJ, et al. (2011). Consumption of Added 
Sugars Is Decreasing in the United States. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 94(3), 726–34. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21753067. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets  |  261


States consider this—in the United States approximately 130 million 
adults are overweight, and 30 percent of them are considered 
obese. The obesity epidemic has reached young adults and children 
and will markedly affect the prevalence of serious health 
consequences in adulthood. Health consequences linked to being 
overweight or obese include Type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular 
disease, arthritis, depression, and some cancers. An infatuation with 
sugary foods and refined grains likely contributes to the epidemic 
proportion of people who are overweight or obese in this country, 
but so do the consumption of high-calorie foods that contain too 
much saturated fat and the sedentary lifestyle of most Americans. 
There is much disagreement over whether high-carbohydrate diets 
increase weight-gain and disease risk, especially when calories are 
not significantly higher between compared diets. Many scientific 
studies demonstrate positive correlations between diets high in 
added sugars with weight gain and disease risk, but some others do 
not show a significant relationship. In regard to refined grains, there 
are no studies that show consumption of refined grains increases 
weight gain or disease risk. What is clear, however, is that getting 
more of your carbohydrates from dietary sources containing whole 
grains instead of refined grains stimulates weight loss and reduces 
disease risk. 
A major source of added sugars in the American diet is soft drinks. 
There is consistent scientific evidence that consuming sugary soft 
drinks increases weight gain and disease risk. An analysis of over 
thirty studies in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 
concluded that there is much evidence to indicate higher 
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is linked with weight 
gain and obesity.2 A study at the Harvard School of Public Health 
2. Malik VS, Schulze MB, Hu FB. (2006). Intake of Sugar-
Sweetened Beverages and Weight Gain: A Systematic 
Review. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 84(2), 
262  |  Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


linked the consumption of sugary soft drinks to an increased risk for 
heart disease.3 
While the sugar and refined grains and weight debate rages on, 
the results of all of these studies has led some public health 
organizations like the American Heart Association (AHA) to 
recommend even a lower intake of sugar per day (fewer than 9 
teaspoons per day for men and fewer than 6 teaspoons for women) 
than what used to be deemed acceptable. After its 2010 scientific 
conference on added sugars, the AHA made the following related 
dietary recommendations4: 
• First, know the number of total calories you should eat each 
day. 
• Consume an overall healthy diet and get the most nutrients for 
the calories, using foods high in added sugars as discretionary 
calories (those left over after getting all recommended 
nutrients subtracted from the calories used). 
• Lower sugar intake, especially when the sugars in foods are not 
tied to positive nutrients such as in sugary drinks, candies, 
cakes, and cookies. 
274–88. http://www.ajcn.org/content/84/2/274.long. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
3. Public Health Takes Aim at Sugar and Salt. Harvard 
School of Public Health. https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/
news/magazine/sugar-and-salt/. Published 2009. 
Accessed September 30, 2017. 
4. Van Horn L, Johnson RK, et al.(2010). Translation and 
Implementation of Added Sugars Consumption 
Recommendations. Circulation, 122, 
2470–90.http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/122/23/
2470/tab-supplemental. Accessed September 27, 2017. 
Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets  |  263


• Focus on calories in certain food categories such as beverages 
and confections, and encourage consumption of positive 
nutrients and foods such as cereals and low-fat or fat-free 
dairy products. 
The Most Notorious Sugar 
Before high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) was marketed as the best 
food and beverage sweetener, sucrose (table sugar) was the 
number-one sweetener in America. (Recall that sucrose, or table 
sugar, is a disaccharide consisting of one glucose unit and one 
fructose unit.) HFCS also contains the simple sugars fructose and 
glucose, but with fructose at a slightly higher concentration. In 
the production of HFCS, corn starch is broken down to glucose, 
and some of the glucose is then converted to fructose. Fructose 
is sweeter than glucose; hence many food manufacturers choose 
to sweeten foods with HFCS. HFCS is used as a sweetener for 
carbonated beverages, condiments, cereals, and a great variety of 
other processed foods. 
Some scientists, public health personnel, and healthcare 
providers believe that fructose is the cause of the obesity epidemic 
and its associated health consequences. The majority of their 
evidence stems from the observation that since the early 1970s 
the number of overweight or obese Americans has dramatically 
increased and so has the consumption of foods containing HFCS. 
However, as discussed, so has the consumption of added sugars 
in general. Animal studies that fuel the fructose opponents show 
fructose is not used to produce energy in the body; instead it is 
mostly converted to fat in the liver—potentially contributing to 
insulin resistance and the development of Type 2 diabetes. 
Additionally, fructose does not stimulate the release of certain 
appetite-suppressing hormones, like insulin, as glucose does. Thus, 
264  |  Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


a diet high in fructose could potentially stimulate fat deposition and 
weight gain. 
In human studies, excessive fructose intake has sometimes been 
associated with weight gain, but results are inconsistent. Moderate 
fructose intake is not associated with weight gain at all. Moreover, 
other studies show that some fructose in the diet actually improves 
glucose metabolism especially in people with Type 2 diabetes.5 
In fact, people with diabetes were once advised to use fructose 
as an alternative sweetener to table sugar. Overall, there is no good 
evidence that moderate fructose consumption contributes to 
weight gain and chronic disease. At this time conclusive evidence 
is not available on whether fructose is any worse than any other 
added sugar in increasing the risk for obesity, Type 2 diabetes, and 
cardiovascular disease. 
Do Low-Carbohydrate Diets Affect Health? 
Since the early 1990s, marketers of low-carbohydrate diets have 
bombarded us with the idea that eating fewer carbohydrates 
promotes weight loss and that these diets are superior to others in 
their effects on weight loss and overall health. The most famous of 
these low-carbohydrate diets is the Atkins diet. Others include the 
“South Beach” diet, the “Zone” diet, and the “Earth” diet. Despite the 
claims these diets make, there is little scientific evidence to support 
that low-carbohydrate diets are significantly better than other diets 
in promoting long-term weight loss. A study in The Nutritional 
5. Elliott SS, Keim NL, et al. (2002). Fructose, Weight Gain, 
and the Insulin Resistance Syndrome. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition, 76(5),911–22. http://www.ajcn.org/
content/76/5/911.full. Accessed September 27, 2017. 
Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets  |  265


Journal concluded that all diets, (independent of carbohydrate, fat, 
and protein content) that incorporated an exercise regimen 
significantly decreased weight and waist circumference in obese 
women.6 
Some studies do provide evidence that in comparison to other 
diets, low-carbohydrate diets improve insulin levels and other risk 
factors for Type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The overall 
scientific consensus is that consuming fewer calories in a balanced 
diet will promote health and stimulate weight loss, with significantly 
better results achieved when combined with regular exercise. 
Health Benefits of Whole Grains in the Diet 
While excessive consumption of simple carbohydrates is potentially 
bad for your health, consuming more complex carbohydrates is 
extremely beneficial to health. There is a wealth of scientific 
evidence supporting that replacing refined grains with whole grains 
decreases the risk for obesity, Type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular 
disease. Whole grains are great dietary sources of fiber, vitamins, 
minerals, healthy fats, and a vast amount of beneficial plant 
chemicals, all of which contribute to the effects of whole grains 
on health. Eating a high-fiber meal as compared to a low-fiber 
6. Kerksick CM, Wismann-Bunn J, et al. (2010). Changes in 
Weight Loss, Body Composition, and Cardiovascular 
Disease Risk after Altering Macronutrient Distributions 
During a Regular Exercise Program in Obese Women. 
The Journal of Nutrition, 9(59). 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3000832/ . Accessed September 27, 2017. 
266  |  Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
meal (see Figure 4.14 “Fibers Role in Carbohydrate Digestion and 
Absorption”) can significantly slow down the absorption process 
therefore affecting blood glucose levels.  Americans typically do not 
consume the recommended amount of whole grains, which is 50 
percent or more of grains from whole grains. 
Figure 4.14 Fibers Role in Carbohydrate Digestion and Absorption 
Diets high in whole grains have repeatedly been shown to decrease 
weight. A large group of studies all support that consuming more 
than two servings of whole grains per day reduces one’s chances of 
getting Type 2 diabetes by 21 percent.7 The Nurses’ Health Study 
found that women who consumed two to three servings of whole 
7. de Munter JS, Hu FB, et al. (2007). Whole Grain, Bran, 
and Germ Intake and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes: A 
Prospective Cohort Study and Systematic Review. PLOS 
Medicine, 4(8), e261. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17760498. Accessed September 27, 2017. 
Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets  |  267


grain products daily were 30 percent less likely to have a heart 
attack.8 
The AHA makes the following statements on whole grains9: 
• “Dietary fiber from whole grains, as part of an overall healthy 
diet, helps reduce blood cholesterol levels and may lower risk 
of heart disease.” 
• “Fiber-containing foods, such as whole grains, help provide a 
feeling of fullness with fewer calories and may help with 
weight management.” 
Figure 4.15 Grain Consumption Statistics in America 
8. Liu S, Stampfer MJ, et al. (1999). Whole-Grain 
Consumption and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease: 
Results from the Nurses’ Health Study. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition, 70(3), 412–19. http://www.ajcn.org/
content/70/3/412.long. Accessed September 27, 2017. 
9. Whole Grains and Fiber. American Heart Association. 
http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/GettingHealthy/
NutritionCenter/HealthyDietGoals/Whole-Grains-and-
Fiber_UCM_303249_Article.jsp. Updated 2017. Accessed 
September 30, 2017. 
268  |  Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


Source: Economic Research Service. http://www.ers.usda.gov/
data-products/commodity-consumption-by-population-
characteristics/documentation.aspx. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets  |  269


Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=192 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=192 
270  |  Health Consequences and Benefits of High-Carbohydrate Diets


Carbohydrates and Personal 
Diet Choices 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
In this chapter, you learned what carbohydrates are, the different 
types of carbohydrates in your diet, and that excess consumption 
of some types of carbohydrates cause disease while others decrease 
disease risk. Now that we know the benefits of eating the right 
carbohydrate, we will examine exactly how much should be eaten to 
promote health and prevent disease. 
How Many Carbohydrates Does a Person Need? 
The Food and Nutrition Board of IOM has set the Recommended 
Dietary Allowance (RDA) of carbohydrates for children and adults 
at 130 grams per day. This is the average minimum amount the 
brain requires to function properly. The Acceptable Macronutrient 
Distribution Range (AMDR) for carbohydrates is between 45 and 
65 percent of your total caloric daily intake. This means that on 
a 2,000 kilocalorie diet, a person should consume between 225 
and 325 grams of carbohydrate each day. According to the IOM 
not more than 25 percent of total calories consumed should come 
from added sugars. The World Health Organization and the AHA 
recommend much lower intakes of added sugars—10 percent or less 
of total calories consumed. The IOM has also set Adequate Intakes 
for dietary fiber, which are 38 and 25 grams for men and women, 
respectively. The recommendations for dietary fiber are based upon 
the intake levels known to prevent against heart disease. 
Table 4.2 Dietary Reference Intakes For Carbohydrates And Fiber 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet
Choices  |  271


Carbohydrate Type 
RDA (g/day) 
AMDR (% 
calories) 
Total Carbohydrates 
130 
45–65 
Added Sugars 
< 25 
Fiber 
38 (men),* 25 
(women)* 
* denotes Adequate Intake 
Dietary Sources of Carbohydrates 
Carbohydrates are contained in all five food groups: grains, fruits, 
vegetables, meats, beans (only in some processed meats and beans), 
and dairy products. Fast-releasing carbohydrates are more 
prevalent in fruits, fruit juices, and dairy products, while slow-
releasing carbohydrates are more plentiful in starchy vegetables, 
beans, and whole grains. Fast-releasing carbohydrates are also 
found in large amounts in processed foods, soft drinks, and sweets. 
On average, a serving of fruits, whole grains, or starches contains 
15 grams of carbohydrates. A serving of dairy contains about 12 
grams of carbohydrates, and a serving of vegetables contains about 
5 grams of carbohydrates. Table 4.3 “Carbohydrates in Foods 
(grams/serving)” gives the specific amounts of carbohydrates, fiber, 
and added sugar of various foods. 
Table 4.3 Carbohydrates in Foods (grams/serving) 
272  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


Foods 
Total 
Carbohydrates 
Sugars Fiber Added 
Sugars 
Banana 
27 (1 medium) 
14.40 
3.1 
0 
Lentils 
40 (1 c.) 
3.50 
16.0 
0 
Snap beans 
8.7 (1 c.) 
1.60 
4.0 
0 
Green pepper 
5.5 (1 medium) 
2.90 
2.0 
0 
Corn tortilla 
10.7 (1) 
0.20 
1.5 
0 
Bread, wheat bran 
17.2 (1 slice) 
3.50 
1.4 
3.4 
Bread, rye 
15.5 (1 slice) 
1.20 
1.9 
1.0 
Bagel (plain) 
53 (1 medium) 
5.30 
2.3 
4.8 
Brownie 
36 (1 square) 
20.50 
1.2 
20.0 
Oatmeal cookie 
22.3 (1 oz.) 
12.00 
2.0 
7.7 
Cornflakes 
23 (1 c.) 
1.50 
0.3 
1.5 
Pretzels 
47 (10 twists) 
1.30 
1.7 
0 
Popcorn 
(homemade) 
58 (100 g) 
0.50 
10.0 
0 
Skim milk 
12 (1 c.) 
12.00 
0 
0 
Cream (half and 
half) 
0.65 (1 Tbs.) 
0.02 
0 
0 
Cream substitute 
1.0 (1 tsp.) 
1.00 
0 
1.0 
Cheddar cheese 
1.3 (1 slice) 
0.50 
0 
0 
Yogurt (with fruit) 
32.3 (6 oz.) 
32.30 
0 
19.4 
Caesar dressing 
2.8 (1 Tbs.) 
2.80 
0 
2.4 
Sources: 
• National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference. US 
Department of Agriculture. http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/
foodcomp/search/. Updated December 7, 2011. Accessed 
September 17, 2017. 
• Database for the Added Sugars Content of Selected Foods. US 
Department of Agriculture. http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/
foodcomp/search/. Published February 2006. Accessed 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  273


September 27, 2017. 
It’s the Whole Nutrient Package 
In choosing dietary sources of carbohydrates the best ones are 
those that are nutrient dense, meaning they contain more essential 
nutrients per calorie of energy. In general, nutrient-dense 
carbohydrates are minimally processed and include whole-grain 
breads and cereals, low-fat dairy products, fruits, vegetables, and 
beans. In contrast, empty-calorie carbohydrate foods are highly 
processed and often contain added sugars and fats. Soft drinks, 
cakes, cookies, and candy are examples of empty-calorie 
carbohydrates. 
They 
are 
sometimes 
referred 
to 
as 
‘bad 
carbohydrates,’ as they are known to cause health problems when 
consumed in excess. 
Understanding Carbohydrates from Product 
Information 
While nutrition facts labels aid in determining the amount of 
carbohydrates you eat, they do not help in determining whether 
a food is refined or not. The ingredients list provides some help 
in this regard. It identifies all of the food’s ingredients in order of 
concentration, with the most concentrated ingredient first. When 
choosing between two breads, pick the one that lists whole wheat 
(not wheat flour) as the first ingredient, and avoid those with other 
flour ingredients, such as white flour or corn flour. (Enriched wheat 
flour refers to white flour with added vitamins.) Eat less of products 
that list HFCS and other sugars such as sucrose, honey, dextrose, 
and cane sugar in the first five ingredients. If you want to eat less 
processed foods then, in general, stay away from products with 
274  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


long ingredient lists. On the front of food and beverages the 
manufacturers may include claims such as “sugar-free,” “reduced 
sugar,” “high fiber,” etc.. The Nutrition and Labeling Act of 1990 
has defined for the food industry and consumers what these labels 
mean (Table 4.4 “Food Labels Pertaining to Carbohydrates”). 
Table 4.4 Food Labels Pertaining to Carbohydrates 
Label 
Meaning 
Sugar-free 
Contains less than 0.5 grams of sugar per serving 
Reduced 
sugar 
Contains 25 percent less sugar than similar product 
Less sugar 
Contains 25 percent less sugar than similar product, and 
was not altered by processing to become so 
No sugars 
added 
No sugars added during processing 
High fiber 
Contains at least 20 percent of daily value of fiber in each 
serving 
A good 
source of 
fiber 
Contains between 10 and 19 percent of the daily value of 
fiber per serving 
More fiber 
Contains 10 percent or more of the daily value of fiber per 
serving 
Source: Appendix A: Definitions of Nutrient Claims. Guidance for 
Industry: A Food Labeling Guide. US Food and Drug Administration. 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
GuidanceDocuments/FoodLabelingNutrition/FoodLabelingGuide/
ucm064911.htm. Updated October 2009. Accessed September 22, 
2017. 
In addition, the FDA permits foods that contain whole oats (which 
contain soluble fiber) to make the health claim on the package that 
the food reduces the risk of coronary heart disease. The FDA no 
longer permits Cheerios to make the claim that by eating their 
cereal “you can lower your cholesterol four percent in six weeks.” 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  275


Personal Choices 
Carbohydrates are in most foods so you have a great variety of 
choices with which to meet the carbohydrates recommendations 
for a healthy diet. The 2010 Dietary Guidelines recommends eating 
more unrefined carbohydrates and more fiber, and reducing 
consumption of foods that are high in added sugars. To accomplish 
these recommendations use some or all of the following 
suggestions: 
• Get more daily carbohydrate servings from whole grains by 
eating a whole-grain cereal for breakfast, using whole-grain 
bread to make a sandwich for lunch, and eating a serving of 
beans and/or nuts with dinner. 
• Make sure to get at least three servings (or more) of all the 
grains you eat as whole grains every day. A serving of whole 
grains is equal to one slice of whole-wheat bread, one ounce of 
whole-grain cereal, and one-half cup of cooked cereal, brown 
rice, or whole-wheat pasta. 
Food products made with cornmeal use the whole grain so 
choose tortillas, corn cereals, and corn breads with cornmeal 
listed as the first ingredient. 
• When baking, substitute whole-wheat flour or other whole-
grain flour for some of the refined white flour. 
• If you like bread at dinner, choose a whole-grain muffin over a 
Kaiser roll or baguette. 
Add beans, nuts, or seeds to salad—they add texture and taste. 
• Choose whole-grain pastas and brown rice, cook al dente, and 
add some beans and vegetables in equal portions. 
• Change it up a bit and experience the taste and satisfaction of 
other whole grains such as barley, quinoa, and bulgur. 
• Eat snacks high in fiber, such as almonds, pistachios, raisins, 
and air-popped popcorn. 
Add an artichoke and green peas to your dinner plate more 
276  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


often. 
• Calm your “sweet tooth” by eating fruits, such as berries or an 
apple. 
• Replace sugary soft drinks with seltzer water, tea, or a small 
amount of 100 percent fruit juice added to water or soda water. 
The Food Industry: Functional Attributes of 
Carbohydrates and the Use of Sugar Substitutes 
In the food industry, both fast-releasing and slow-releasing 
carbohydrates are utilized to give foods a wide spectrum of 
functional attributes, including increased sweetness, viscosity, bulk, 
coating ability, solubility, consistency, texture, body, and browning 
capacity. The differences in chemical structure between the 
different carbohydrates confer their varied functional uses in foods. 
Starches, gums, and pectins are used as thickening agents in making 
jam, cakes, cookies, noodles, canned products, imitation cheeses, 
and a variety of other foods. Molecular gastronomists use slow-
releasing carbohydrates, such as alginate, to give shape and texture 
to their fascinating food creations. Adding fiber to foods increases 
bulk. Simple sugars are used not only for adding sweetness, but 
also to add texture, consistency, and browning. In ice cream, the 
combination of sucrose and corn syrup imparts sweetness as well as 
a glossy appearance and smooth texture. 
Due to the potential health consequences of consuming too many 
added sugars, sugar substitutes have replaced them in many foods 
and beverages. Sugar substitutes may be from natural sources or 
artificially made. Those that are artificially made are called artificial 
sweeteners and must be approved by the FDA for use in foods 
and beverages. The artificial sweeteners approved by the FDA are 
saccharin, aspartame, acesulfame potassium, neotame, advantame, 
and sucralose. Stevia is an example of a naturally derived sugar 
substitute. It comes from a plant commonly known as sugarleaf 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  277


and does not require FDA approval. Sugar alcohols, such as xylitol, 
sorbitol, erythritol, and mannitol, are sugar alcohols that occur 
naturally in some fruits and vegetables. However, they are 
industrially synthesized with yeast and other microbes for use as 
food additives. The FDA requires that foods disclose the fact that 
they contain sugar alcohols, but does not require scientific testing 
of it. (Though many of them have undergone studies anyway.) In 
comparison to sucrose, artificial sweeteners are significantly 
sweeter (in fact, by several hundred times), but sugar alcohols are 
more often less sweet than sucrose (see Table 4.5 “Relative 
Sweetness of Sugar Substitutes”). Artificial sweeteners and Stevia 
are not digested or absorbed in significant amounts and therefore 
are not a significant source of calories in the diet. Sugar alcohols 
are somewhat digested and absorbed and, on average, contribute 
about half of the calories as sucrose (4 kilocalories/gram). These 
attributes 
make 
sugar 
substitutes 
attractive 
for 
many 
people—especially those who want to lose weightand/or better 
manage their blood-glucose levels. 
Table 4.5 Relative Sweetness Of Sugar Substitutes 
Sweetener 
Trade Names 
Sweeter than Sucrose (times) 
Saccharine 
“Sweet-N-Lo” 
300.0 
Aspartame 
“NutraSweet,” “Equal” 80-200.0 
Acesulfame-K “Sunette” 
200.0 
Neotame 
7,000.0–13,000.0 
Advantame 
20,000 
Sucralose 
“Splenda” 
600.0 
Stevia 
250.0–300.0 
Xylitol 
0.8 
Mannitol 
0.5 
Sorbitol 
0.6 
Erythritol 
1.0 
278  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


Benefits of Sugar Substitutes 
Consuming foods and beverages containing sugar substitutes may 
benefit health by reducing the consumption of simple sugars, which 
are higher in calories, cause tooth decay, and are potentially linked 
to chronic disease. Artificial sweeteners are basically non-nutrients 
though not all are completely calorie-free. However, because they 
are so intense in sweetness they are added in very small amounts 
to foods and beverages. Artificial sweeteners and sugar alcohols are 
not “fermentable sugars” and therefore they do not cause tooth 
decay. Chewing gum with artificial sweeteners is the only proven 
way that artificial sweeteners promote oral health. The American 
Dental Association (ADA) allows manufacturers of chewing gum to 
label packages with an ADA seal if they have convincing scientific 
evidence demonstrating their product either reduces plaque acids, 
cavities, or gum disease, or promotes tooth remineralization. 
There is limited scientific evidence that consuming products with 
artificial sweeteners decreases weight. In fact, some studies suggest 
the intense sweetness of these products increases appetite for 
sweet foods and may lead to increased weight gain. Also, there 
is very limited evidence that suggests artificial sweeteners lower 
blood-glucose levels. Additionally, many foods and beverages 
containing artificial sweeteners and sugar alcohols are still empty-
calorie foods (i.e. chewing sugarless gum or drinking diet soda pop) 
are not going to better your blood-glucose levels or your health. 
Health Concerns 
The most common side effect of consuming products containing 
sugar substitutes is gastrointestinal upset, a result of their 
incomplete digestion. Since the introduction of sugar substitutes to 
the food and beverage markets, the public has expressed concern 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  279


about their safety. The health concerns of sugar substitutes 
originally 
stemmed 
from 
scientific 
studies, 
which 
were 
misinterpreted by both scientists and the public. 
In the early 1970s scientific studies were published that 
demonstrated that high doses of saccharin caused bladder tumors 
in rats. This information fueled the still-ongoing debate of the 
health consequences of all artificial sweeteners. In actuality, the 
results from the early studies were completely irrelevant to humans. 
The large doses (2.5 percent of diet) of saccharine caused a pellet 
to form in the rat’s bladder. That pellet chronically irritated the 
bladder wall, eventually resulting in tumor development. Since this 
study, scientific investigation in rats, monkeys, and humans have 
not found any relationship between saccharine consumption and 
bladder cancer. In 2000, saccharin was removed from the US 
National Toxicology Program’s list of potential carcinogens.1 
There have been health concerns over other artificial sweeteners, 
most notably aspartame (sold under the trade names of NutraSweet 
and Equal). The first misconception regarding aspartame was that 
it was linked with an increase in the incidence of brain tumors in 
the United States. It was subsequently discovered that the increase 
in brain tumors started eight years prior to the introduction of 
aspartame to the market. Today, aspartame is accused of causing 
brain damage, autism, emotional disorders, and a myriad of other 
disorders and diseases. Some even believe aspartame is part of a 
governmental conspiracy to make people dumber. The reality is 
there is no good scientific evidence backing any of these 
accusations, and that aspartame has been the most scientifically 
1. Artificial Sweeteners and Cancer. National Cancer 
Institute. http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/
factsheet/Risk/artificial-sweeteners. Updated August 5, 
2009. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
280  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


tested food additive. It is approved for use as an artificial sweetener 
in over ninety countries. 
Aspartame is made by joining aspartic acid and phenylalanine to 
a dipeptide (with a methyl ester). When digested, it is broken down 
to aspartic acid, phenylalanine, and methanol. People who have the 
rare genetic disorder phenylketonuria (PKU) have to avoid products 
containing aspartame. Individuals who have PKU do not have a 
functional enzyme that converts phenylalanine to the amino acid 
tyrosine. This causes a buildup of phenylalanine and its metabolic 
products in the body. If PKU is not treated, the buildup of 
phenylalanine causes progressive brain damage and seizures. The 
FDA requires products that contain aspartame to state on the 
product label, “Phenylketonurics: Contains Phenylalanine.” For more 
details on sugar substitutes please refer to Table 4.6 “Sweeteners”. 
Table 4.6 Sweeteners 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  281


Sweeteners 
with Trade 
Name 
Calories 
Source/Origin 
Consumer 
Recommendations 
Controversial 
Issues 
Aspartame 
• NutraSweet 
• Equal 
4 kcal/g 
Composed of two 
amino acids 
(phenylalanine + 
aspartic acid) + 
methanol.Two 
hundred times 
sweeter than 
sucrose. 
FDA set maximum 
Acceptable Daily 
Intakes (ADI):50 
mg/kg body 
weight = 16 12 oz. 
diet soft drinks 
for adults. 
*Cannot be used 
in products 
requiring cooking. 
People with 
PKU should not 
consume 
aspartame. 
Children have 
potential to reach 
ADI if consuming 
many beverages, 
desserts, frozen 
desserts, and 
gums containing 
aspartame 
routinely. 
Saccharin 
• Sweet ‘n’ 
Low 
0 kcal/g 
Discovered in 1878. 
The basic 
substance is 
benzoic 
sulfinide.Three 
hundred times 
sweeter than 
sucrose. 
ADI: 5 mg/kg 
body weight.*Can 
be used in 
cooking. 
1970s, high doses 
of saccharin 
associated with 
bladder cancer in 
laboratory 
animals. In 1977, 
FDA proposed 
banning saccharin 
from use in food 
• protest 
launched by 
consumer & 
interest 
groups 
• warning label 
listed on 
products 
about 
saccharin and 
cancer risk in 
animals until 
2001 when 
studies 
concluded 
that it did not 
cause cancer 
in humans 
282  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


Acesulfame K 
• Sunnette 
• Sweet One 
0 kcal/g 
Discovered in 1967. 
Composed of an 
organic salt, 
potassium (K). 
Structure is very 
similar to 
saccharin’s.It 
passes through the 
body unchanged 
which means it 
does not provide 
energy. 
Two hundred 
times sweeter than 
sucrose. 
ADI: 15 mg/kg 
body weight.Body 
cannot digest it. 
*Can be used in 
cooking. 
Cyclamates 
• Sugar Twin 
0 kcal/g 
Thirty times 
sweeter than 
sucrose.Discovered 
in 1937. 
No ADI available. 
1949, cyclamate 
approved by FDA 
for use. Cyclamate 
was classified as 
GRAS (Generally 
Recognized As 
Safe) until 1970 
when it was 
removed from 
GRAS status and 
banned from use 
in all food and 
beverage products 
within the United 
States on the basis 
of one study that 
indicated it caused
bladder cancer in 
rats. Approval still 
pending for use in 
the United States 
since the 
ban.Canada and 
other countries 
use this type of 
sweetener. 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  283


Sucralose 
• Splenda 
1 
Splenda 
packet 
contains 
3.31 
calories 
= 1g 
First discovered in 
1976. Approved for 
use in 1998 in the 
United States and 
in 1991 in 
Canada.Derived 
from sucrose in 
which three of its 
hydroxyl (OH) 
groups are 
replaced by 
chlorine (Cl−). 
Six hundred times 
sweeter than 
sugar. 
ADI: 5 mg/kg 
body weight.*Can 
be used in 
cooking. 
Stevioside 
• Stevia 
• Sweet Leaf 
N/A 
Derived from 
stevia plant found 
in South America. 
Stevia rebaudiana 
leaves. 
Classified as 
GRAS.Considered 
to be a dietary 
supplement and 
approved not as 
an additive, but as 
a dietary 
supplement. 
Used sparingly, 
stevia may do little
harm, but FDA 
could not approve 
extensive use of 
this sweetener due
to concerns 
regarding its effect
on reproduction, 
cancer 
development, and 
energy 
metabolism. 
284  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


Sucrose 
• Sugar 
~4 kcal/
g 
Extracted from 
either sugar beets 
or sugar cane, 
which is then 
purified and 
crystallized. 
It is illegal to sell 
true raw sugar in 
the United States 
because when raw 
it contains dirt 
and insect parts, 
as well as other 
byproducts. Raw 
sugar products 
sold in the United 
States have 
actually gone 
through more 
than half of the 
same steps in the 
refining process 
as table sugar. 
Over-consumption
has been linked to 
several health 
effects such as 
tooth decay or 
dental caries and 
contributes to 
increased risk for 
chronic diseases. 
Honey 
3 kcal/g 
Made from 
sucrose. Contains 
nectar of flowering 
plants. Made by 
bees. Sucrose is 
fructose + glucose; 
however, honey 
contains more 
calories than 
sucrose because 
honey is denser. 
*Considered safe 
for baking and 
cooking.Infants 
under twelve 
months old should 
not be given 
honey because 
their digestive 
tracts cannot 
handle the 
bacteria found in 
honey. Older 
children and 
adults are 
immune to these 
effects. Honey 
contains some 
harmful bacteria 
that can cause 
fatal food 
poisoning in 
infants. 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  285


HFCS 
• high 
fructose 
corn syrup 
Dry 
form: 4 
kcal/g; 
Liquid 
form: 3 
kcal/g 
Corn is milled to 
produce corn 
starch, then the 
cornstarch is 
further processed 
to yield corn syrup. 
Controversial 
because it is found 
ubiquitously in 
processed food 
products, which 
could lead to 
overconsumption. 
Study results are 
varied regarding 
its role in chronic 
disease. 
Sugar Alcohols 
• Sorbitol 
• Xylitol 
• Mannitol 
2–4 
kcal/
g.Not 
calorie 
free 
Sugar 
alcohols.Sorbitol is 
derived from 
glucose. 
Less likely to 
cause tooth decay 
than 
sucrose.Sugar 
alcohols have a 
laxative effect. 
May cause 
diarrhea and 
gastrointestinal 
distress if 
consumed in large 
amounts. 
Regulation 
Prior to introducing any new artificial sweetener into foods it is 
rigorously tested and must be legally approved by the FDA. The 
FDA regulates artificial sweeteners along with other food additives, 
which number in the thousands. The FDA is responsible for 
determining whether a food additive presents “a reasonable 
certainty of no harm” to consumers when used as proposed. The 
FDA uses the best scientific evidence available to make the 
statement of no harm, but it does declare that science has its limits 
286  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


and that the “FDA can never be absolutely certain of the absence of 
any risk from the use of any substance.”2 
The FDA additionally has established ADIs for artificial 
sweeteners. The ADIs are the maximum amount in milligrams per 
kilogram of body weight considered safe to consume daily (mg/kg 
bw/day) and incorporates a large safety factor. The following list 
contains the artificial sweeteners approved for use in foods and 
beverages in the United States, and their ADIs: 
• Acesulfame potassium (Sunett, Sweet One). ADI = 15 mg/kg 
bw/day 
• Aspartame (Equal, NutraSweet). ADI = 50 mg/kg bw/day 
• Neotame. ADI = 18 mg/kg bw/day 
• Saccharin (SugarTwin, Sweet’N Low). ADI = 5 mg/kg bw/day 
• Sucralose (Splenda). ADI = 5 mg/kg bw/day 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
2. Overview of Food Ingredients, Additives and Colors. US 
Food and Drug Administration. https://wayback.archive-
it.org/7993/20170722025446/https://www.fda.gov/
Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/
FoodAdditivesIngredients/ucm094211.htm. Updated 
April 2010. Accessed September 22, 2017. 
Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices  |  287


features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=194 
 
288  |  Carbohydrates and Personal Diet Choices


PART V 
CHAPTER 5. LIPIDS 
Chapter 5. Lipids  |  289




Image by Phu 
Thinh Co / 
CC BY-SA 2.0 
Introduction 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
E hinu auaneʻi na nuku, he pōmaikaʻi ko laila 
Where the mouths are shiny with fat food, prosperity is there 
Introduction  |  291


Learning Objectives 
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to: 
• 
Describe the function and role of lipids in the body 
• 
Describe the process of lipid digestion and 
absorption 
• 
Describe tools and approaches for balancing your 
diet with lipids 
The coconut is considered to be the ‘Tree of Life’ in the Pacific. The 
coconut provided wood for shelter and craftsmanship along with 
being a source of hydration, animal feed and income through copra. 
It also serves many ecological functions such as a source for shade, 
protection from the wind, and coastal erosion control.1 A thriving 
coconut tree provided Pacific Island families with great prosperity. 
For many Pacific communities the coconut provided a valuable 
source of fat to a diet that was generally low in fat as the major 
nutrient found in the mature coconut is fat. As you read further, you 
will learn the different types of fats, their essential roles in the body, 
and the potential health consequences and benefits of diets rich in 
particular lipids. You will be better equipped to decide the best way 
to get your nutritional punch from various fats in your diet. 
Lipids are important molecules that serve different roles in the 
human body. A common misconception is that fat is simply 
fattening. However, fat is probably the reason we are all here. 
Throughout history, there have been many instances when food was 
1. Snowdon W, Osborn T. (2003). Coconut: It’s role in 
health. Secretariat of the Pacific. 
292  |  Introduction


scarce. Our ability to store excess caloric energy as fat for future 
usage allowed us to continue as a species during these times of 
famine. So, normal fat reserves are a signal that metabolic processes 
are efficient and a person is healthy. 
Lipids are a family of organic compounds that are mostly insoluble 
in water. Composed of fats and oils, lipids are molecules that yield 
high energy and have a chemical composition mainly of carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen. Lipids perform three primary biological 
functions within the body: they serve as structural components of 
cell membranes, function as energy storehouses, and function as 
important signaling molecules. 
The three main types of lipids are triglycerides, phospholipids, 
and sterols. Triglycerides make up more than 95 percent of lipids 
in the diet and are commonly found in fried foods, vegetable oil, 
butter, whole milk, cheese, cream cheese, and some meats. 
Naturally occurring triglycerides are found in many foods, including 
avocados, olives, corn, and nuts. We commonly call the triglycerides 
in our food “fats” and “oils.” Fats are lipids that are solid at room 
temperature, whereas oils are liquid. As with most fats, triglycerides 
do not dissolve in water. The terms fats, oils, and triglycerides are 
discretionary and can be used interchangeably. In this chapter when 
we use the word fat, we are referring to triglycerides. 
Phospholipids make up only about 2 percent of dietary lipids. 
They are water-soluble and are found in both plants and animals. 
Phospholipids are crucial for building the protective barrier, or 
membrane, around your body’s cells. In fact, phospholipids are 
synthesized in the body to form cell and organelle membranes. In 
blood and body fluids, phospholipids form structures in which fat is 
enclosed and transported throughout the bloodstream. 
Sterols are the least common type of lipid. Cholesterol is perhaps 
the best well-known sterol. Though cholesterol has a notorious 
reputation, the body gets only a small amount of its cholesterol 
through food—the body produces most of it. Cholesterol is an 
important component of the cell membrane and is required for the 
synthesis of sex hormones, and bile salts. 
Introduction  |  293


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Later in this chapter, we will examine each of these lipids in more 
detail and discover how their different structures function to keep 
your body working. 
Figure 5.1 Types of Lipids 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
294  |  Introduction


recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=200 
 
Introduction  |  295


The Functions of Lipids in 
the Body 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Storing Energy 
The excess energy from the food we eat is digested and 
incorporated into adipose tissue, or fatty tissue. Most of the energy 
required by the human body is provided by carbohydrates and 
lipids. As discussed in the Carbohydrates chapter, glucose is stored 
in the body as glycogen. While glycogen provides a ready source of 
energy, lipids primarily function as an energy reserve. As you may 
recall, glycogen is quite bulky with heavy water content, thus the 
body cannot store too much for long. Alternatively, fats are packed 
together tightly without water and store far greater amounts of 
energy in a reduced space. A fat gram is densely concentrated with 
energy—it contains more than double the amount of energy than a 
gram of carbohydrate. Energy is needed to power the muscles for 
all the physical work and play an average person or child engages in. 
For instance, the stored energy in muscles propels an athlete down 
the track, spurs a dancer’s legs to showcase the latest fancy steps, 
and keeps all the moving parts of the body functioning smoothly. 
Unlike other body cells that can store fat in limited supplies, fat 
cells are specialized for fat storage and are able to expand almost 
indefinitely in size. An overabundance of adipose tissue can result 
in undue stress on the body and can be detrimental to your health. 
A serious impact of excess fat is the accumulation of too much 
cholesterol in the arterial wall, which can thicken the walls of 
arteries and lead to cardiovascular disease. Thus, while some body 
296  |  The Functions of Lipids in the
Body


fat is critical to our survival and good health, in large quantities it 
can be a deterrent to maintaining good health. 
Regulating and Signaling 
Triglycerides control the body’s internal climate, maintaining 
constant temperature. Those who don’t have enough fat in their 
bodies tend to feel cold sooner, are often fatigued, and have 
pressure sores on their skin from fatty acid deficiency. Triglycerides 
also help the body produce and regulate hormones. For example, 
adipose tissue secretes the hormone leptin, which regulates 
appetite. In the reproductive system, fatty acids are required for 
proper reproductive health. Women who lack proper amounts may 
stop menstruating and become infertile. Omega-3 and omega-6 
essential fatty acids help regulate cholesterol and blood clotting 
and control inflammation in the joints, tissues, and bloodstream. 
Fats also play important functional roles in sustaining nerve impulse 
transmission, memory storage, and tissue structure. More 
specifically in the brain, lipids are focal to brain activity in structure 
and in function. They help form nerve cell membranes, insulate 
neurons, and facilitate the signaling of electrical impulses 
throughout the brain. 
Insulating and Protecting 
Did you know that up to 30 percent of body weight is comprised of 
fat tissue? Some of this is made up of visceral fat or adipose tissue 
surrounding delicate organs. Vital organs such as the heart, kidneys, 
and liver are protected by visceral fat. The composition of the brain 
is outstandingly 60 percent fat, demonstrating the major structural 
role that fat serves within the body. You may be most familiar with 
The Functions of Lipids in the Body  |  297


subcutaneous fat, or fat underneath the skin. This blanket layer 
of tissue insulates the body from extreme temperatures and helps 
keep the internal climate under control. It pads our hands and 
buttocks and prevents friction, as these areas frequently come in 
contact with hard surfaces. It also gives the body the extra padding 
required when engaging in physically demanding activities such as 
ice- or roller skating, horseback riding, or snowboarding. 
Aiding Digestion and Increasing Bioavailability 
The dietary fats in the foods we eat break down in our digestive 
systems and begin the transport of precious micronutrients. By 
carrying fat-soluble nutrients through the digestive process, 
intestinal absorption is improved. This improved absorption is also 
known as increased bioavailability. Fat-soluble nutrients are 
especially important for good health and exhibit a variety of 
functions. Vitamins A, D, E, and K—the fat-soluble vitamins—are 
mainly found in foods containing fat. Some fat-soluble vitamins 
(such as vitamin A) are also found in naturally fat-free foods such 
as green leafy vegetables, carrots, and broccoli. These vitamins are 
best absorbed when combined with foods containing fat. Fats also 
increase the bioavailability of compounds known as phytochemicals, 
which are plant constituents such as lycopene (found in tomatoes) 
and beta-carotene (found in carrots). Phytochemicals are believed 
to promote health and well-being. As a result, eating tomatoes with 
olive oil or salad dressing will facilitate lycopene absorption. Other 
essential nutrients, such as essential fatty acids, are constituents of 
the fats themselves and serve as building blocks of a cell. 
Figure 5.2 Food Sources of Omega 3’s 
298  |  The Functions of Lipids in the Body


n/a 
Note that removing the lipid elements from food also takes away 
the food’s fat-soluble vitamin content. When products such as grain 
and dairy are processed, these essential nutrients are lost. 
Manufacturers replace these nutrients through a process called 
enrichment. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
The Functions of Lipids in the Body  |  299


recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=203 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=203 
300  |  The Functions of Lipids in the Body


The Role of Lipids in Food 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
High Energy Source 
Fat-rich foods naturally have a high caloric density. Foods that are 
high in fat contain more calories than foods high in protein or 
carbohydrates. As a result, high-fat foods are a convenient source 
of energy. For example, 1 gram of fat or oil provides 9 kilocalories 
of energy, compared with 4 kilocalories found in 1 gram of 
carbohydrate or protein. Depending on the level of physical activity 
and on nutritional needs, fat requirements vary greatly from person 
to person. When energy needs are high, the body welcomes the 
high-caloric density of fats. For instance, infants and growing 
children require proper amounts of fat to support normal growth 
and development. If an infant or child is given a low-fat diet for 
an extended period, growth and development will not progress 
normally. Other individuals with high-energy needs are athletes, 
people who have physically demanding jobs, and those recuperating 
from illness. 
When the body has used all of its calories from carbohydrates 
(this can occur after just twenty minutes of exercise), it initiates 
fat usage. A professional swimmer must consume large amounts of 
food energy to meet the demands of swimming long distances, so 
eating fat-rich foods makes sense. In contrast, if a person who leads 
a sedentary lifestyle eats the same high-density fat foods, they will 
intake more fat calories than their body requires within just a few 
bites. Use caution—consumption of calories over and beyond energy 
requirements is a contributing factor to obesity. 
The Role of Lipids in Food  |  301


Smell and Taste 
Fat contains dissolved compounds that contribute to mouth-
watering aromas and flavors. Fat also adds texture to food. Baked 
foods are supple and moist. Frying foods locks in flavor and lessens 
cooking time. How long does it take you to recall the smell of your 
favorite food cooking? What would a meal be without that savory 
aroma to delight your senses and heighten your preparedness for 
eating a meal? 
Fat plays another valuable role in nutrition. Fat contributes to 
satiety, or the sensation of fullness. When fatty foods are swallowed 
the body responds by enabling the processes controlling digestion 
to retard the movement of food along the digestive tract, thus 
promoting an overall sense of fullness. Oftentimes before the feeling 
of fullness arrives, people overindulge in fat-rich foods, finding the 
delectable taste irresistible. Indeed, the very things that make fat-
rich foods attractive also make them a hindrance to maintaining a 
healthful diet. 
302  |  The Role of Lipids in Food


Tools for Change 
There are many 
sources of omega-3 foods. 
It is important to strike a proper balance between 
omega-3 and omega-6 fats in your diet. Research suggests 
that a diet that is too high in omega-6 fats distorts the 
balance of proinflammatory agents, promoting chronic 
inflammation and causing the potential for health problems 
such as asthma, arthritis, allergies, or diabetes. Omega-6 
fats compete with omega-3 fats for enzymes and will 
actually replace omega-3 fats. The typical western diet is 
characterized by an excessive consumption of foods high in 
omega-6 fatty acids. To gain proper balance between the 
two, increase your omega-3 fat intake by eating more fatty 
fish or other sources of omega-3 fatty acids at least two 
times per week. 
The Role of Lipids in Food  |  303


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=206 
 
304  |  The Role of Lipids in Food


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese/ 
CC BY 4.0 
How Lipids Work 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Lipids are unique organic compounds, each serving key roles and 
performing specific functions within the body. As we discuss the 
various types of lipids (triglycerides, phospholipids, and sterols) in 
further detail, we will compare their structures and functions and 
examine their impact on human health. 
Triglycerides Structure and Functions 
Triglycerides are the main form of lipid found in the body and in the 
diet. Fatty acids and glycerol are the building blocks of triglycerides. 
Glycerol is a thick, smooth, syrupy compound that is often used 
in the food industry. To form a triglyceride, a glycerol molecule 
is joined by three fatty acid chains. triglycerides contain varying 
mixtures of fatty acids. 
Figure 5.3 The Structure of a Triglycerides 
How Lipids Work  |  305


Fatty Acids 
Fatty acids determine if the compound is solid or liquid at room 
temperature. Fatty acids consist of a carboxylic acid (−COOH) group 
on one end of a carbon chain and a methyl group (−CH3) on the 
other end. Fatty acids can differ from one another in two important 
ways—carbon chain length and degree of saturation. 
It’s All in the Chain 
Fatty acids have different chain lengths and different compositions. 
Foods have fatty acids with chain lengths between four and twenty-
four carbons and most of them contain an even number of carbon 
atoms. When the carbon chain length is shorter, the melting point 
of the fatty acid becomes lower—and the fatty acid becomes more 
liquid. 
Figure 5.4 Structures of a Saturated, Monounsaturated, and 
Polyunsaturated Fat 
306  |  How Lipids Work


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
 
Fatty Acid Types in the Body 
The fatty-acid profile of the diet directly correlates to the 
tissue lipid profile of the body. It may not solely be the 
quantity of dietary fat that matters. More directly, the type 
of dietary fat ingested has been shown to affect body 
weight, composition, and metabolism. The fatty acids 
consumed are often incorporated into the triglycerides 
within the body. Evidence confirms that saturated fatty 
acids are linked to higher rates of weight retention when 
compared to other types of fatty acids. Alternatively, the 
How Lipids Work  |  307


fatty acids found in fish oil are proven to reduce the rate of 
weight gain as compared to other fatty acids.1 
Degrees of Saturation 
Fatty acid chains are held together by carbon atoms that attach 
to each other and to hydrogen atoms. The term saturation refers 
to whether or not a fatty acid chain is filled (or “saturated”) to 
capacity with hydrogen atoms. If each available carbon bond holds 
a hydrogen atom we call this a saturated fatty acid chain. All carbon 
atoms in such a fatty acid chain are bonded with single bonds. 
Sometimes the chain has a place where hydrogen atoms are missing. 
This is referred to as the point of unsaturation. 
When one or more bonds between carbon atoms are a double 
bond (C=C), that fatty acid is called an unsaturated fatty acid, as 
it has one or more points of unsaturation. Any fatty acid that has 
only one double bond is a monounsaturated fatty acid, an example 
of which is olive oil (75 percent of its fat is monounsaturated). 
Monounsaturated fats help regulate blood cholesterol levels, 
thereby reducing the risk for heart disease and stroke. A 
polyunsaturated fatty acid is a fatty acid with two or more double 
bonds or two or more points of unsaturation. Soybean oil contains 
high 
amounts 
of 
polyunsaturated 
fatty 
acids. 
Both 
1. Mori T, Kondo H. (2007). Dietary fish oil upregulates 
intestinal lipid metabolism and reduces body weight gain 
in C57BL/6J mice. Journal of Nutrition, 137(12):2629-34. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18029475. 
Accessed September 22, 2017. 
308  |  How Lipids Work


monounsaturated fats and polyunsaturated fats provide nutrition 
that is essential for normal cell development and healthy skin. 
Foods that have a high percentage of saturated fatty acids tend 
to be solid at room temperature. Examples of these are fats found 
in chocolate (stearic acid, an eighteen-carbon saturated fatty acid 
is a primary component) and meat. Foods rich in unsaturated fatty 
acids, such as olive oil (oleic acid, an eighteen-carbon unsaturated 
fatty acid, is a major component) tend to be liquid at room 
temperature. Flaxseed oil is rich in alpha-linolenic acid, which is 
an unsaturated fatty acid and becomes a thin liquid at room 
temperature. 
Knowing the connection between chain length, degree of 
saturation, and the state of the fatty acid (solid or liquid) is 
important for making food choices. If you decide to limit or redirect 
your intake of fat products, then choosing unsaturated fat is more 
beneficial than choosing a saturated fat. This choice is easy enough 
to make because unsaturated fats tend to be liquid at room 
temperature (for example, olive oil) whereas saturated fats tend 
to be solid at room temperature (for example, butter). Avocados 
are rich in unsaturated fats. Most vegetable and fish oils contain 
high quantities of polyunsaturated fats. Olive oil and canola oil are 
also rich in monounsaturated fats. Conversely, tropical oils are an 
exception to this rule in that they are liquid at room temperature 
yet high in saturated fat. Palm oil (often used in food processing) 
is highly saturated and has been proven to raise blood cholesterol. 
Shortening, margarine, and commercially prepared products (in 
general) report to use only vegetable-derived fats in their 
processing. But even so, much of the fat they use may be in the 
saturated and trans fat categories. 
Cis or Trans Fatty Acids? 
The introduction of a carbon double bond in a carbon chain, as in 
How Lipids Work  |  309


an unsaturated fatty acid, can result in different structures for the 
same fatty acid composition. When the hydrogen atoms are bonded 
to the same side of the carbon chain, it is called a cis fatty acid. 
Because the hydrogen atoms are on the same side, the carbon chain 
has a bent structure. Naturally occurring fatty acids usually have a 
cis configuration. 
In a trans fatty acid, the hydrogen atoms are attached on opposite 
sides of the carbon chain. Unlike cis fatty acids, most trans fatty 
acids are not found naturally in foods, but are a result of a process 
called hydrogenation. Hydrogenation is the process of adding 
hydrogen to the carbon double bonds, thus making the fatty acid 
saturated (or less unsaturated, in the case of partial hydrogenation). 
This is how vegetable oils are converted into semisolid fats for use 
in the manufacturing process. 
According to the ongoing Harvard Nurses’ Health Study, trans 
fatty acids have been associated with increased risk for coronary 
heart disease because of the way they negatively impact blood 
cholesterol levels.2 
Figure 5.5 Structures of Saturated, Unsaturated, Cis and Trans 
fatty Acids 
2. Introduction to “Fats and Cholesterol: Out with the Bad, 
In with the Good” The Nutrition Source. Harvard School 
of Public Health. http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/
nutritionsource/what-should-you-eat/fats-full-
story/#references. Updated 2017. Accessed September 
28, 2017. 
310  |  How Lipids Work


Image by 
Openstax 
Biology / CC 
BY 4.0 
Interestingly, some naturally occurring trans fats do not pose the 
same health risks as their artificially engineered counterparts. 
These trans fats are found in ruminant animals such as cows, sheep, 
and goats, resulting in trans fatty acids being present in our meat, 
milk, and other dairy product supply. Reports from the US 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) indicate that these trans fats 
comprise 15 to 20 percent of the total trans-fat intake in our diet. 
While we know that trans fats are not exactly harmless, it seems 
that any negative effect naturally occurring trans fats have are 
counteracted by the presence of other fatty acid molecules in these 
animal products, which work to promote human health. 
How Lipids Work  |  311


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=212 
 
312  |  How Lipids Work


Nonessential and Essential 
Fatty Acids 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Fatty acids are vital for the normal operation of all body systems. 
The circulatory system, respiratory system, integumentary system, 
immune system, brain, and other organs require fatty acids for 
proper function. The body is capable of synthesizing most of the 
fatty acids it needs from food. These fatty acids are known as 
nonessential fatty acids. However, there are some fatty acids that 
the body cannot synthesize and these are called essential fatty 
acids. It is important to note that nonessential fatty acids doesn’t 
mean unimportant; the classification is based solely on the ability of 
the body to synthesize the fatty acid. 
Essential fatty acids must be obtained from food. They fall into 
two categories—omega-3 and omega-6. The 3 and 6 refer to the 
position of the first carbon double bond and the omega refers to 
the methyl end of the chain. Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids 
are precursors to important compounds called eicosanoids. 
Eicosanoids are powerful hormones that control many other 
hormones and important body functions, such as the central 
nervous system and the immune system. Eicosanoids derived from 
omega-6 fatty acids are known to increase blood pressure, immune 
response, and inflammation. In contrast, eicosanoids derived from 
omega-3 fatty acids are known to have heart-healthy effects. Given 
the contrasting effects of the omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, a 
proper dietary balance between the two must be achieved to ensure 
optimal health benefits. 
Essential fatty acids play an important role in the life and death 
of cardiac cells, immune system function, and blood pressure 
regulation. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is an omega-3 essential 
Nonessential and Essential Fatty
Acids  |  313


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
fatty acid shown to play important roles in synaptic transmission in 
the brain during fetal development. 
Some excellent sources of omega-3 and omega-6 essential fatty 
acids are fish, flaxseed oil, hemp, walnuts, and leafy vegetables. 
Because these essential fatty acids are easily accessible, essential 
fatty acid deficiency is extremely rare. 
Figure 5.6 Essential Fatty Acids 
Phospholipids 
Like triglycerides, phospholipids have a glycerol backbone. But 
unlike triglycerides, phospholipids are diglycerides (two fatty-acid 
molecules attached to the glycerol backbone) while their third fatty-
acid chain has a phosphate group coupled with a nitrogen-
containing group. This unique structure makes phospholipids water 
soluble. Phospholipids are what we call amphiphilic—the fatty-acid 
sides are hydrophobic (dislike water) and the phosphate group is 
hydrophilic (likes water). 
In the body phospholipids bind together to form cell membranes. 
The amphiphilic nature of phospholipids governs their function as 
components of cell membranes. The phospholipids form a double 
314  |  Nonessential and Essential Fatty Acids


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
layer in cell membranes, thus effectively protecting the inside of the 
cell from the outside environment while at the same time allowing 
for transport of fat and water through the membrane. 
Figure 5.7 The Structure of a Phospholipid 
Phospholipids are ideal emulsifiers that can keep oil and water 
mixed. Emulsions are mixtures of two liquids that do not mix. 
Without emulsifiers, the fat and water content would be somewhat 
separate within food. Lecithin (phosphatidylcholine), found in egg 
yolk, honey, and mustard, is a popular food emulsifier. Mayonnaise 
demonstrates lecithin’s ability to blend vinegar and oil to create the 
stable, spreadable condiment that so many enjoy. Food emulsifiers 
play an important role in making the appearance of food appetizing. 
Adding emulsifiers to sauces and creams not only enhances their 
appearance but also increases their freshness. 
Lecithin’s crucial role within the body is clear, because it is 
present in every cell throughout the body; 28 percent of brain 
matter is composed of lecithin and 66 percent of the fat in the liver 
is lecithin. Many people attribute health-promoting properties to 
lecithin, such as its ability to lower blood cholesterol and aid with 
weight loss. There are several lecithin supplements on the market 
Nonessential and Essential Fatty Acids  |  315


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
broadcasting these claims. However, as the body can make most 
phospholipids, it is not necessary to consume them in a pill. The 
body makes all of the lecithin that it needs. 
Figure 
5.8 
The 
Difference 
Between 
Triglycerides 
and 
Phospholipids 
Sterols 
Sterols have a very different structure from triglycerides and 
phospholipids. Most sterols do not contain any fatty acids but rather 
multiring structures. They are complex molecules that contain 
interlinking rings of carbon atoms, with side chains of carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen attached. Cholesterol is the best-known 
sterol because of its role in heart disease. It forms a large part 
of the plaque that narrows the arteries in atherosclerosis. In stark 
contrast, cholesterol does have specific beneficial functions to 
perform in the body. Like phospholipids, cholesterol is present in 
all body cells as it is an important substance in cell membrane 
structure. Approximately 25 percent of cholesterol in the body is 
localized in brain tissue. Cholesterol is used in the body to make a 
number of important things, including vitamin D, glucocorticoids, 
and the sex hormones, progesterone, testosterone, and estrogens. 
316  |  Nonessential and Essential Fatty Acids


“Cholesterol 
Chemical 
Structure” by 
Wesalius / 
Public 
Domain 
Notably, the sterols found in plants resemble cholesterol in 
structure. However, plant sterols inhibit cholesterol absorption in 
the human body, which can contribute to lower cholesterol levels. 
Although cholesterol is preceded by its infamous reputation, it is 
clearly a vital substance in the body that poses a concern only when 
there is excess accumulation of it in the blood. Like lecithin, the 
body can synthesize cholesterol. 
Figure 5.9 The Structure of Cholesterol 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
Nonessential and Essential Fatty Acids  |  317


recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=218 
 
318  |  Nonessential and Essential Fatty Acids


Digestion and Absorption of 
Lipids 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Lipids are large molecules and generally are not water-soluble. Like 
carbohydrates and protein, lipids are broken into small components 
for absorption. Since most of our digestive enzymes are water-
based, how does the body break down fat and make it available for 
the various functions it must perform in the human body? 
From the Mouth to the Stomach 
The first step in the digestion of triglycerides and phospholipids 
begins in the mouth as lipids encounter saliva. Next, the physical 
action of chewing coupled with the action of emulsifiers enables the 
digestive enzymes to do their tasks. The enzyme lingual lipase, along 
with a small amount of phospholipid as an emulsifier, initiates the 
process of digestion. These actions cause the fats to become more 
accessible to the digestive enzymes. As a result, the fats become tiny 
droplets and separate from the watery components. 
Figure 5.10 Lipid Digestion and Absorption 
Digestion and Absorption of
Lipids  |  319


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Illustrated diagram of human body showing lipid 
digestion and absorption. 1. Small amount of lipid 
digestion occurs in stomach due to gastric lipase 
produced in stomach 2. Bile produced in liver, stored 
in gallbladder, release into small intestine to aid 
digestion and absorption of lipids. 3. Pancreatic lipase 
produced by pancreas and released into small 
intestine to break down triglycerides, fatty acids, and 
glycerol. 4. In small intestine products from fat 
digestion and bile acids form micelle, which moves 
towrad the microvilli allowing lipids to diffuse into 
mucosal cells. 5. Inside mucuosal cell, fatty acids and 
monoglycerides reassembled into triglycerides and 
incorporated into lipids transport particles called 
chylomicrons, which enter the lymph vessel. 
In the stomach, gastric lipase starts to break down triglycerides 
into diglycerides and fatty acids. Within two to four hours after 
eating a meal, roughly 30 percent of the triglycerides are converted 
to diglycerides and fatty acids. The stomach’s churning and 
contractions help to disperse the fat molecules, while the 
diglycerides derived in this process act as further emulsifiers. 
However, even amid all of this activity, very little fat digestion occurs 
in the stomach. 
Going to the Bloodstream 
As stomach contents enter the small intestine, the digestive system 
sets out to manage a small hurdle, namely, to combine the separated 
fats with its own watery fluids. The solution to this hurdle is bile. 
Bile contains bile salts, lecithin, and substances derived from 
320  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


Scheme of a 
micelle 
formed by 
phospholipid
s in an 
aqueous 
solution by 
Emmanuel 
Boutet / CC 
BY-SA 3.0 
cholesterol so it acts as an emulsifier. It attracts and holds onto 
fat while it is simultaneously attracted to and held on to by water. 
Emulsification increases the surface area of lipids over a thousand-
fold, making them more accessible to the digestive enzymes. 
Once the stomach contents have been emulsified, fat-breaking 
enzymes work on the triglycerides and diglycerides to sever fatty 
acids from their glycerol foundations. As pancreatic lipase enters 
the small intestine, it breaks down the fats into free fatty acids 
and monoglycerides. Yet again, another hurdle presents itself. How 
will the fats pass through the watery layer of mucus that coats 
the absorptive lining of the digestive tract? As before, the answer 
is bile. Bile salts envelop the fatty acids and monoglycerides to 
form micelles. Micelles have a fatty acid core with a water-soluble 
exterior. This allows efficient transportation to the intestinal 
microvillus. 
Here, 
the 
fat 
components 
are 
released 
and 
disseminated into the cells of the digestive tract lining. 
Figure 5.11 Micelle Formation 
Figure 5.12 Schematic Diagram Of A Chylomicron 
Digestion and Absorption of Lipids  |  321


Chylomicron
s Contain 
Triglycerides 
Cholesterol 
Molecules 
and other 
Lipids by 
OpenStax 
College / CC 
BY 3.0 
Just as lipids require special handling in the digestive tract to move 
within a water-based environment, they require similar handling 
to travel in the bloodstream. Inside the intestinal cells, the 
monoglycerides and fatty acids reassemble themselves into 
triglycerides. Triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids form 
lipoproteins when joined with a protein carrier. Lipoproteins have 
an inner core that is primarily made up of triglycerides and 
cholesterol esters (a cholesterol ester is a cholesterol linked to a 
fatty acid). The outer envelope is made of phospholipids 
interspersed with proteins and cholesterol. Together they form a 
chylomicron, which is a large lipoprotein that now enters the 
lymphatic system and will soon be released into the bloodstream 
via the jugular vein in the neck. Chylomicrons transport food fats 
perfectly through the body’s water-based environment to specific 
destinations such as the liver and other body tissues. 
Cholesterols 
are 
poorly 
absorbed 
when 
compared 
to 
phospholipids and triglycerides. Cholesterol absorption is aided by 
an increase in dietary fat components and is hindered by high fiber 
content. This is the reason that a high intake of fiber is 
322  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
recommended to decrease blood cholesterol. Foods high in fiber 
such as fresh fruits, vegetables, and oats can bind bile salts and 
cholesterol, preventing their absorption and carrying them out of 
the colon. 
If fats are not absorbed properly as is seen in some medical 
conditions, a person’s stool will contain high amounts of fat. If fat 
malabsorption persists the condition is known as steatorrhea. 
Steatorrhea can result from diseases that affect absorption, such as 
Crohn’s disease and cystic fibrosis. 
Figure 5.13 Cholesterol and Soluble Fiber 
The Truth about Storing and Using Body Fat 
Before the prepackaged food industry, fitness centers, and weight-
loss programs, our ancestors worked hard to even locate a meal. 
They made plans, not for losing those last ten pounds to fit into a 
bathing suit for vacation, but rather for finding food. Today, this is 
why we can go long periods without eating, whether we are sick 
with a vanished appetite, our physical activity level has increased, or 
there is simply no food available. Our bodies reserve fuel for a rainy 
day. 
One way the body stores fat was previously touched upon in the 
Digestion and Absorption of Lipids  |  323


Carbohydrates chapter. The body transforms carbohydrates into 
glycogen that is in turn stored in the muscles for energy. When 
the muscles reach their capacity for glycogen storage, the excess 
is returned to the liver, where it is converted into triglycerides and 
then stored as fat. 
In a similar manner, much of the triglycerides the body receives 
from food is transported to fat storehouses within the body if not 
used for producing energy. The chylomicrons are responsible for 
shuttling the triglycerides to various locations such as the muscles, 
breasts, external layers under the skin, and internal fat layers of the 
abdomen, thighs, and buttocks where they are stored by the body 
in adipose tissue for future use. How is this accomplished? Recall 
that chylomicrons are large lipoproteins that contain a triglyceride 
and fatty-acid core. Capillary walls contain an enzyme called 
lipoprotein-lipase 
that 
dismantles 
the 
triglycerides 
in 
the 
lipoproteins into fatty acids and glycerol, thus enabling these to 
enter into the adipose cells. Once inside the adipose cells, the fatty 
acids and glycerol are reassembled into triglycerides and stored for 
later use. Muscle cells may also take up the fatty acids and use them 
for muscular work and generating energy. When a person’s energy 
requirements exceed the amount of available fuel presented from a 
recent meal or extended physical activity has exhausted glycogen 
energy reserves, fat reserves are retrieved for energy utilization. 
As the body calls for additional energy, the adipose tissue 
responds by dismantling its triglycerides and dispensing glycerol 
and fatty acids directly into the blood. Upon receipt of these 
substances the energy-hungry cells break them down further into 
tiny fragments. These fragments go through a series of chemical 
reactions that yield energy, carbon dioxide, and water. 
Figure 5.14 Storing and Using Fat 
324  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Understanding Blood Cholesterol 
You may have heard of the abbreviations LDL and HDL with respect 
to heart health. These abbreviations refer to low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL), respectively. Lipoproteins 
are characterized by size, density, and composition. As the size of 
the lipoprotein increases, the density decreases. This means that 
HDL is smaller than LDL. Why are they referred to as “good” and 
“bad” cholesterol? What should you know about these lipoproteins? 
Major Lipoproteins 
Recall that chylomicrons are transporters of fats throughout the 
watery environment within the body. After about ten hours of 
circulating throughout the body, chylomicrons gradually release 
their triglycerides until all that is left of their composition is 
Digestion and Absorption of Lipids  |  325


cholesterol-rich remnants. These remnants are used as raw 
materials by the liver to formulate specific lipoproteins. Following is 
a list of the various lipoproteins and their functions: 
• VLDLs. Very low-density lipoproteins are made in the liver 
from remnants of chylomicrons and transport triglycerides 
from the liver to various tissues in the body. As the VLDLs 
travel through the circulatory system, the lipoprotein lipase 
strips the VLDL of triglycerides. As triglyceride removal 
persists, the VLDLs become intermediate-density lipoproteins. 
• IDLs. Intermediate-density lipoproteins transport a variety of 
fats and cholesterol in the bloodstream and are a little under 
half triglyceride in composition. While travelling in the 
bloodstream, cholesterol is gained from other lipoproteins 
while circulating enzymes strip its phospholipid component. 
When IDLs return to the liver, they are transformed into low-
density lipoprotein. 
• LDLs. As low-density lipoproteins are commonly known as the 
“bad cholesterol” it is imperative that we understand their 
function in the body so as to make healthy dietary and lifestyle 
choices. LDLs carry cholesterol and other lipids from the liver 
to tissue throughout the body. LDLs are comprised of very 
small amounts of triglycerides, and house over 50 percent 
cholesterol and cholesterol esters. How does the body receive 
the lipids contained therein? As the LDLs deliver cholesterol 
and other lipids to the cells, each cell’s surface has receptor 
systems specifically designed to bind with LDLs. Circulating 
LDLs in the bloodstream bind to these LDL receptors and are 
consumed. Once inside the cell, the LDL is taken apart and its 
cholesterol is released. In liver cells these receptor systems aid 
in controlling blood cholesterol levels as they bind the LDLs. A 
deficiency of these LDL binding mechanisms will leave a high 
quantity of cholesterol traveling in the bloodstream, which can 
lead to heart disease or atherosclerosis. Diets rich in saturated 
fats will prohibit the LDL receptors which, are critical for 
326  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


https://www
.intechopen.c
om/books/
lipoproteins-
role-in-healt
h-and-diseas
es/
pathophysiol
ogy-of-lipopr
otein-oxidati
on 
regulating cholesterol levels. 
• HDLs. High-density lipoproteins are responsible for carrying 
cholesterol out of the bloodstream and into the liver, where it 
is either reused or removed from the body with bile. HDLs 
have a very large protein composition coupled with low 
cholesterol content (20 to 30 percent) compared to the other 
lipoproteins. Hence, these high-density lipoproteins are 
commonly called “good cholesterol.” 
Figure 5.15 Lipoprotein Classes 
The classification of the major types of lipoproteins are based on 
their densities. Density range is shown as well as lipid (red) and 
protein (blue) content. (Diagram not to scale) / CC BY 3.0 
Blood Cholesterol Recommendations 
For healthy total blood cholesterol, the desired range you would 
want to maintain is under 200 mg/dL. More specifically, when 
Digestion and Absorption of Lipids  |  327


looking at individual lipid profiles, a low amount of LDL and a high 
amount of HDL prevents excess buildup of cholesterol in the 
arteries and wards off potential health hazards. An LDL level of 
less than 100 milligrams per deciliter is ideal while an LDL level 
above 160 mg/dL would be considered high. In contrast, a low value 
of HDL is a telltale sign that a person is living with major risks 
for disease. Values of less than 40 mg/dL for men and 50 mg/
dL for women mark a risk factor for developing heart disease. In 
short, elevated LDL blood lipid profiles indicate an increased risk 
of heart attack, while elevated HDL blood lipid profiles indicate 
a reduced risk.The University of Maryland Medical Center reports 
that omega-3 fatty acids promote lower total cholesterol and lower 
triglycerides in people with high cholesterol.1 
It is suggested that people consume omega-3 fatty acids such as 
alpha-linolenic acid in their diets regularly. Polyunsaturated fatty 
acids are especially beneficial to consume because they both lower 
LDL and elevate HDL, thus contributing to healthy blood cholesterol 
levels. The study also reveals that saturated and trans fatty acids 
serve as catalysts for the increase of LDL cholesterol. Additionally, 
trans fatty acids decrease HDL levels, which can impact negatively 
on total blood cholesterol. 
1. Omega-3 fatty acids. University of Maryland Medical 
Center.  http://www.umm.edu/altmed/articles/
omega-3-000316.htm. Updated August 5, 2015. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
328  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=225 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
Digestion and Absorption of Lipids  |  329


http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=225 
330  |  Digestion and Absorption of Lipids


Tools for Change 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Being conscious of the need to reduce cholesterol means limiting 
the consumption of saturated fats and trans fats. Remember that 
saturated fats found in some meat, whole-fat dairy products, and 
tropical oils elevate your total cholesterol. Trans fats, such as the 
ones often found in margarines, processed cookies, pastries, 
crackers, fried foods, and snack foods also elevate your cholesterol 
levels. Read and select from the following suggestions as you plan 
ahead: 
1. Soluble fiber reduces cholesterol absorption in the 
bloodstream. Try eating more oatmeal, oat bran, kidney beans, 
apples, pears, citrus fruits, barley, and prunes. 
2. Fatty fish are heart-healthy due to high levels of omega-3 fatty 
acids that reduce inflammation and lower cholesterol levels. 
Consume mackerel, lake trout, herring, sardines, tuna, salmon, 
and halibut. Grilling or baking is the best to avoid unhealthy 
trans fats that could be added from frying oil. 
3. Walnuts, almonds, peanuts, hazelnuts, pecans, some pine nuts, 
and pistachios all contain high levels of unsaturated fatty acids 
that aid in lowering LDL. Make sure the nuts are raw and 
unsalted. Avoid sugary or salty nuts. One ounce each day is a 
good amount. 
4. Olive oil contains a strong mix of antioxidants and 
monounsaturated fat, and may lower LDL while leaving HDL 
intact. Two tablespoons per day in place of less healthy 
saturated fats may contribute to these heart-healthy effects 
without adding extra calories. Extra virgin olive oil promises a 
greater effect, as the oil is minimally processed and contains 
more heart-healthy antioxidants. 
Tools for Change  |  331


Testing Your Lipid Profile 
The danger of consuming foods rich in cholesterol and saturated 
and trans fats cannot be overemphasized. Regular testing can 
provide the foreknowledge necessary to take action to help prevent 
any life-threatening events. 
Current guidelines recommend testing for anyone over age 
twenty. If there is family history of high cholesterol, your healthcare 
provider may suggest a test sooner than this. Testing calls for a 
blood sample to be drawn after nine to twelve hours of fasting 
for an accurate reading. (By this time, most of the fats ingested 
from the previous meal have circulated through the body and the 
concentration of lipoproteins in the blood will be stabilized.) 
According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the following 
total cholesterol values are used to target treatment1 
• Desirable. Under 200 mg/dL 
• Borderline high. 200–239 mg/dL 
• High risk. 240 mg/dL and up 
According to the NIH, the following desired values are used to 
measure an overall lipid profile: 
• LDL. Less than 160 mg/dL (if you have heart disease or 
diabetes, less than 100 mg/dL) 
1. High Blood Cholesterol: What You Need to Know. 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health. NIH Publication. 
 http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/
wyntk.htm. Updated June 2005.Accessed September 28, 
2017. 
332  |  Tools for Change


• HDL. Greater than 40–60 mg/dL 
• triglycerides. 10–150 mg/dL 
• VLDL. 2–38 mg/dL 
Balancing Your Diet with Lipids 
You may reason that if some fats are healthier than other fats, why 
not consume as much healthy fat as desired? Remember, everything 
in moderation. As we review the established guidelines for daily fat 
intake, the importance of balancing fat consumption with proper fat 
sources will be explained. 
Recommended Fat Intake 
The acceptable macronutrient distribution range (AMDR) from the 
Dietary Reference Intake Committee for adult fat consumption is as 
follows2: 
• Fat calories should be limited to 20–35 percent of total calories 
with most fats coming from polyunsaturated and 
monounsaturated fats, such as those found in fish, nuts, and 
vegetable oils. 
• Consume fewer than 10 percent of calories from saturated fats. 
Some studies suggest that lowering the saturated fat content 
2. Dietary Reference Intakes: Macronutrients. Institute of 
Medicine. https://www.nal.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/fnic_uploads/DRIEssentialGuideNutReq.pdf. 
Published 2006. Accessed September 28, 2017. 
Tools for Change  |  333


to less than 7 percent can further reduce the risk of heart 
disease. 
• Keep the consumption of trans fats (any food label that reads 
hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated oil) to a minimum, less 
than 1 percent of calories. 
• Think lean and low-fat when selecting meat, poultry, milk, and 
milk products. 
The current AMDR for child and adolescent fat consumption (for 
children over four) are as follows: 
• For children between ages four and eighteen years, between 25 
and 35 percent of caloric intake should be from fat. 
• For all age groups, most fats should come from 
polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats such as fish, nuts, 
and vegetable oils. 
Identifying Sources of Fat 
Population-based studies of American diets have shown that intake 
of saturated fat is more excessive than intake of trans fat and 
cholesterol. Saturated fat is a prominent source of fat for most 
people as it is so easily found in animal fats, tropical oils such as 
coconut and palm oil, and full-fat dairy products. Oftentimes the 
fat in the diet of an average young person comes from foods such 
as cheese, pizza, cookies, chips, desserts, and animal meats such 
as chicken, burgers, sausages, and hot dogs. To aim for healthier 
dietary choices, the American Heart Association (AHA) recommends 
choosing lean meats and vegetable alternatives, choosing dairy 
products with low fat content, and minimizing the intake of trans 
334  |  Tools for Change


fats. The AHA guidelines also recommend consuming fish, especially 
oily fish, at least twice per week.3 
These more appropriate dietary choices will allow for enjoyment 
of a wide variety of foods while providing the body with the 
recommended levels of fat from healthier sources. Evaluate the 
following sources of fat in your overall dietary pattern: 
• Monounsaturated fat. This type of fat is found in plant oils. 
Common sources are nuts (almonds, cashews, pecans, peanuts, 
and walnuts) and nut products, avocados, olive oil, sesame oil, 
high oleic safflower oil, sunflower oil, and canola oil. 
• Polyunsaturated fat. This type of fat is found mainly in plant-
based foods, oils, and fish. Common sources are nuts (walnuts, 
hazel nuts, pecans, almonds, and peanuts), soybean oil, corn 
oil, safflower oil, flaxseed oil, canola oil, and fish (trout, 
herring, and salmon). 
• Saturated fat. This fat is found in animal products, dairy 
products, palm and coconut oils, and cocoa butter. Limit these 
products to less than 10 percent of your overall dietary fat 
consumption. 
• Trans fatty acids. Stick margarines, shortening, fast foods, 
commercial baked goods, and some snack foods contain trans 
fats. Limit your consumption of these products to keep trans 
fats to less than 1 percent of your fat consumption. 
• Omega-3 fatty acids (linolenic acid). Good sources of these are 
canola oil, flaxseed oil, soybean oil, olive oil, nuts, seeds, whole 
grains, legumes, and green leafy vegetables. 
• Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA). Good sources of these are 
3. Fish and Omega-3 Fatty Acids. American Heart 
Association. https://healthyforgood.heart.org/Eat-
smart/Articles/Fish-and-Omega-3-Fatty-Acids. 
Updated March 24, 2017. Accessed October 5, 2017. 
Tools for Change  |  335


cod liver oil and fish such as tuna, herring, mackerel, salmon, 
and trout. 
• Omega-6 fatty acids (linoleic acid). Eggs, poultry, most 
vegetable oils, wheat germ oil, whole grains, baked goods, and 
cereals contain these fatty acids. Omega-6 fatty acids are 
present abundantly in nuts and seeds such as flaxseeds, 
sunflower seeds, sesame seeds, and watermelon seeds. 
Omega-3 and Omega-6 Fatty Acids 
Recall that the body requires fatty acids and is adept at synthesizing 
the majority of these from fat, protein, and carbohydrate. However, 
when we say essential fatty acid we are referring to the two fatty 
acids that the body cannot create on its own, namely, linolenic acid 
and linoleic acid. 
• Omega-3 Fatty Acids. At the helm of the omega-3 fatty acid 
family is linolenic acid. From this fatty acid, the body can make 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). 
Linolenic acid is found in nuts, seeds, whole grains, legumes, 
and vegetable oil such as soybean, canola, and flaxseed. EPA 
and DHA are found abundantly in fatty fish. 
• Omega-6 Fatty Acids. At the helm of the omega-6 fatty acid 
family is linoleic acid. Like linolenic acid, the body uses linoleic 
acid to make other important substances such as arachidonic 
acid (ARA) that is used to make eicosanoids. Recall that 
eicosanoids perform critical roles in the body as they affect a 
broad spectrum of functions. The word eicosanoid originates 
from the Greek word eicosa, meaning twenty, because this 
hormone is derived from ARA that is twenty carbon atoms in 
length. Eicosanoids affect the synthesis of all other body 
hormones and control all body systems, such as the central 
nervous system and the immune system. Among the many 
336  |  Tools for Change


functions eicosanoids serve in the body, their primary function 
is to regulate inflammation. Without these hormones the body 
would not be able to heal wounds, fight infections, or fight off 
illness each time a foreign germ presented itself. Eicosanoids 
work together with the body’s immune and inflammatory 
processes to play a major role in several important body 
functions, such as circulation, respiration, and muscle 
movement. 
Attain the Omega-3 and Omega-6 Balance 
As our food choices evolve, the sources of omega-6 fatty acids 
in our diets are increasing at a much faster rate than sources of 
omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3s are plentiful in diets of non-
processed foods where grazing animals and foraging chickens roam 
free, eating grass, clover, alfalfa, and grass-dwelling insects. In 
contrast, today’s western diets are bombarded with sources of 
omega-6. For example, we have oils derived from seeds and nuts 
and from the meat of animals that are fed grain. Vegetable oils used 
in fast-food preparations, most snack-foods, cookies, crackers, and 
sweet treats are also loaded with omega-6 fatty acids. Also, our 
bodies synthesize eicosanoids from omega-6 fatty acids and these 
tend to increase inflammation, blood clotting, and cell proliferation, 
while the hormones synthesized from omega-3 fatty acids have just 
the opposite effect. 
While omega-6 fatty acids are essential, they can be harmful 
when they are out of balance with omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-6 
fats are required only in small quantities. Researchers believe that 
when omega-6 fats are out of balance with omega-3 fats in the 
diet they diminish the effects of omega-3 fats and their benefits. 
This imbalance may elevate the risks for allergies, arthritis, asthma, 
coronary heart disease, diabetes, and many types of cancer, 
Tools for Change  |  337


autoimmunity, and neurodegenerative diseases, all of which are 
believed to originate from some form of inflammation in the body. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=227 
 
338  |  Tools for Change


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=227 
Tools for Change  |  339


Lipids and the Food Industry 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
What is the first thing that comes to mind when you read 
ingredients such as “partially hydrogenated oil” and “hydrogenated 
oil” on a food label? Do you think of heart disease, heart health, or 
atherosclerosis? Most people probably do not. As we uncover what 
hydrogenation is and why manufacturers use it, you will be better 
equipped to adhere to healthier dietary choices and promote your 
heart health. 
Hydrogenation: The Good Gone Bad? 
Food manufacturers are aware that fatty acids are susceptible to 
attack by oxygen molecules because their points of unsaturation 
render them vulnerable in this regard. When oxygen molecules 
attack these points of unsaturation the modified fatty acid becomes 
oxidized. The oxidation of fatty acids makes the oil rancid and gives 
the food prepared with it an unappetizing taste. Because oils can 
undergo oxidation when stored in open containers, they must be 
stored in airtight containers and possibly be refrigerated to 
minimize damage from oxidation. Hydrogenation poses a solution 
that food manufacturers prefer. 
When lipids are subjected to hydrogenation, the molecular 
structure of the fat is altered. Hydrogenation is the process of 
adding hydrogen to unsaturated fatty-acid chains, so that the 
hydrogen atoms are connected to the points of saturation and 
results in a more saturated fatty acid. Liquid oils that once 
contained more unsaturated fatty acids become semisolid or solid 
(upon complete hydrogenation) and behave like saturated fats. Oils 
340  |  Lipids and the Food Industry


initially contain polyunsaturated fatty acids. When the process of 
hydrogenation is not complete, for example, not all carbon double 
bonds have been saturated the end result is a partially hydrogenated 
oil. The resulting oil is not fully solid. Total hydrogenation makes 
the oil very hard and virtually unusable. Some newer products are 
now using fully hydrogenated oil combined with nonhydrogenated 
vegetable oils to create a usable fat. 
Manufacturers favor hydrogenation as a way to prevent oxidation 
of oils and ensure longer shelf life. Partially hydrogenated vegetable 
oils are used in the fast food and processed food industries because 
they impart the desired texture and crispness to baked and fried 
foods. Partially hydrogenated vegetable oils are more resistant to 
breakdown from extremely hot cooking temperatures. Because 
hydrogenated oils have a high smoking point they are very well 
suited for frying. In addition, processed vegetable oils are cheaper 
than fats obtained from animal sources, making them a popular 
choice for the food industry. 
Trans fatty acids occur in small amounts in nature, mostly in 
dairy products. However, the trans fats that are used by the food 
industry are produced from the hydrogenation process. Trans fats 
are a result of the partial hydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids, 
which cause them to have a trans configuration, rather than the 
naturally occurring cis configuration. 
Health Implications of Trans Fats 
No trans fats! Zero trans fats! We see these advertisements on a 
regular basis. So widespread is the concern over the issue that 
restaurants, food manufacturers, and even fast-food establishments 
proudly tout either the absence or the reduction of these fats within 
their products. Amid the growing awareness that trans fats may not 
be good for you, let’s get right to the heart of the matter. Why are 
trans fats so bad? 
Lipids and the Food Industry  |  341


Processing naturally occurring fats to modify their texture from 
liquid to semisolid and solid forms results in the development of 
trans fats, which have been linked to an increased risk for heart 
disease. Trans fats are used in many processed foods such as 
cookies, cakes, chips, doughnuts, and snack foods to give them their 
crispy texture and increased shelf life. However, because trans fats 
can behave like saturated fats, the body processes them as if they 
were saturated fats. Consuming large amounts of trans fats has been 
associated with tissue inflammation throughout the body, insulin 
resistance in some people, weight gain, and digestive troubles. In 
addition, the hydrogenation process robs the person of the benefits 
of consuming the original oil because hydrogenation destroys 
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. The AHA states that, like 
saturated fats, trans fats raise LDL “bad cholesterol,” but unlike 
saturated fats, trans fats lower HDL “good cholesterol.” The AHA 
advises limiting trans-fat consumption to less than 1 percent. 
How can you benefit from this information? When selecting your 
foods, steer clear of anything that says “hydrogenated,” “fractionally 
hydrogenated,” or “partially hydrogenated,” and read food labels in 
the following categories carefully: 
• cookies, crackers, cakes, muffins, pie crusts, pizza dough, and 
breads 
• stick margarines and vegetable shortening 
• premixed cake mixes, pancake mixes, and drink mixes 
• fried foods and hard taco shells 
• snack foods (such as chips), candy, and frozen dinners 
Choose brands that don’t use trans fats and that are low in saturated 
fats. 
342  |  Lipids and the Food Industry


Dietary-Fat Substitutes 
In response to the rising awareness and concern over the 
consumption of trans fat, various fat replacers have been developed. 
Fat substitutes aim to mimic the richness, taste, and smooth feel 
of fat without the same caloric content as fat. The carbohydrate-
based replacers tend to bind water and thus dilute calories. Fat 
substitutes can also be made from proteins (for example, egg whites 
and milk whey). However, these are not very stable and are affected 
by changes in temperature, hence their usefulness is somewhat 
limited. 
Tools for Change 
One classic cinnamon roll can have 5 grams of trans fat, which is 
quite high for a single snack. Many packaged foods often have their 
nutrient contents listed for a very small serving size—much smaller 
than what people normally consume—which can easily lead you to 
eat many “servings.” Labeling laws allow foods containing trans fat 
to be labeled “trans-fat free” if there are fewer than 0.5 grams per 
serving. This makes it possible to eat too much trans fat when you 
think you’re not eating any at all because it is labeled trans-fat free. 
Always review the label for trans fat per serving. Check the 
ingredient list, especially the first three to four ingredients, for 
telltale signs of hydrogenated fat such as partially or fractionated 
hydrogenated oil. The higher up the words “partially hydrogenated 
oil” are on the list of ingredients, the more trans fat the product 
contains. 
Measure out one serving and eat one serving only. An even better 
choice would be to eat a fruit or vegetable. There are no trans fats 
and the serving size is more reasonable for similar calories. Fruits 
and vegetables are packed with water, fiber, and many vitamins, 
Lipids and the Food Industry  |  343


minerals, phytonutrients, and antioxidants. At restaurants be aware 
that phrases such as “cooked in vegetable oil” might mean 
hydrogenated vegetable oil, and therefore trans fat. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=229 
 
344  |  Lipids and the Food Industry


Lipids and Disease 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Because heart disease, cancer, and stroke are the three leading 
causes of death in the United States, it is critical to address dietary 
and lifestyle choices that will ultimately decrease risk factors for 
these diseases. According to the US Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS), the following risk factors are controllable: 
high blood pressure, high cholesterol, cigarette smoking, diabetes, 
poor diet, physical inactivity, being overweight, and obesity. 
In light of that, we present the following informational tips to help 
you define, evaluate, and implement healthy dietary choices to last 
a lifetime. The amount and the type of fat that composes a person’s 
dietary profile will have a profound effect upon the way fat and 
cholesterol is metabolized in the body. 
Watch Out for Saturated Fat and 
Cholesterol 
In proper amounts, cholesterol is a compound used by the body 
to sustain many important body functions. In excess, cholesterol 
is harmful if it accumulates in the structures of the body’s vast 
network of blood vessels. High blood LDL and low blood HDL are 
major indicators of blood cholesterol risk. The largest influence on 
blood cholesterol levels rests in the mix of saturated fat and trans 
fat in the diet. According to the Harvard School of Public Health, 
for every extra 2 percent of calories from trans fat consumed per 
day—about the amount found in a midsize order of French fries 
at a fast-food establishment—the risk of coronary heart disease 
Lipids and Disease  |  345


increases by 23 percent1. A buildup of cholesterol in the blood can 
lead to brittle blood vessels and a blockage of blood flow to the 
affected area. 
How saturated is the fat in your diet? Is it really necessary to 
eat saturated fat when the body makes all the saturated fat that it 
needs? Saturated fats should fall into the “bad” category—the body 
does not demand this kind of fat and it is proven to be a forerunner 
of cardiovascular disease. In the United States and other developed 
countries, populations acquire their saturated fat content mostly 
from meat, seafood, poultry (with skin consumed), and whole-milk 
dairy products (cheese, milk, and ice cream). Some plant foods are 
also high in saturated fats, including coconut oil, palm oil, and palm 
kernel oil. 
Food Cholesterol’s Effect on Blood 
Cholesterol 
Dietary cholesterol does have a small impact on overall blood 
cholesterol levels, but not as much as some people may think. The 
average American female consumes 237 milligrams of dietary 
cholesterol per day and for males the figure is slightly higher—about 
358 milligrams. Most people display little response to normal 
dietary cholesterol intake as the body responds by halting its own 
synthesis of the substance in favor of using the cholesterol obtained 
1. Fats and Cholesterol: Out with the Bad, In with the 
Good. Harvard School of Public Health. 
http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/what-
should-you -eat/fats-full-story/. Updated 2017. 
Accessed September 28, 2017. 
346  |  Lipids and Disease


through food. Genetic factors may also influence the way a person’s 
body modifies cholesterol. The 2015-2020 US Dietary Guidelines 
suggest limiting saturated fats, thereby indirectly limiting dietary 
cholesterol since foods that are high in cholesterol tend to be high 
in saturated fats also. 
A Prelude to Disease 
If left unchecked, improper dietary fat consumption can lead down 
a path to severe health problems. An increased level of lipids, 
triglycerides, and cholesterol in the blood is called hyperlipidemia. 
Hyperlipidemia is inclusive of several conditions but more 
commonly refers to high cholesterol and triglyceride levels. When 
blood lipid levels are high, any number of adverse health problems 
may ensue. Consider the following: 
• Cardiovascular disease. According to the AHA, cardiovascular 
disease encompasses a variety of problems, many of which are 
related to the process of atherosclerosis. Over time the 
arteries thicken and harden with plaque buildup, causing 
restricted or at times low or no blood flow to selected areas of 
the body. 
• Heart attack. A heart attack happens when blood flow to a 
section of the heart is cut off due to a blood clot. Many have 
survived heart attacks and go on to return to their lives and 
enjoy many more years of life on this earth. However, dietary 
and lifestyle changes must be implemented to prevent further 
attacks. 
• Ischemic stroke. The most common type of stroke in the 
United States, ischemic stroke, occurs when a blood vessel in 
the brain or leading to the brain becomes blocked, again 
usually from a blood clot. If part of the brain suffers lack of 
blood flow and/or oxygen for three minutes or longer, brain 
Lipids and Disease  |  347


cells will start to die. 
• Congestive heart failure. Sometimes referred to as heart 
failure, this condition indicates that the heart is not pumping 
blood as well as it should. The heart is still working but it is not 
meeting the body’s demand for blood and oxygen. If left 
unchecked, it can progress to further levels of malfunction. 
• Arrhythmia. This is an abnormal rhythm of the heart. The heart 
may beat above one hundred beats per minute (known as 
tachycardia) or below sixty beats per minute (known as 
bradycardia), or the beats are not regular. The heart may not 
be able to pump enough volume of blood to meet the body’s 
needs. 
• Heart valve problems. Stenosis is a condition wherein the heart 
valves become compromised in their ability to open wide 
enough to allow proper blood flow. When the heart valves do 
not close tightly and blood begins to leak between chambers, 
this is called regurgitation. When valves bulge or prolapse back 
into the upper chamber, this condition is called mitral valve 
prolapse. 
• Obesity. Obesity is defined as the excessive accumulation of 
body fat. According to US Surgeon General Richard Carmona, 
obesity is the fastest growing cause of death in America. The 
HHS reports that the number of adolescents who are 
overweight has tripled since 1980 and the prevalence of the 
disease among younger children has doubled2. 
• Obesity has been linked to increased risks of developing 
diabetes and heart disease. To help combat this problem 
important dietary changes are necessary. Reducing the type 
2. Childhood Obesity. US Department of Health and 
Human Services. http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/
child_obesity/. Published May 1, 2005.  Accessed 
October 5, 2012. 
348  |  Lipids and Disease


and amount of carbohydrates and sugar consumed daily is 
critical. Limiting the intake of saturated fats and trans fats, 
increasing physical activity, and eating fewer calories are all 
equally important in this fight against obesity. 
What You Can Do 
Remember that saturated fats are found in large amounts in foods 
of animal origin. They should be limited within the diet. 
Polyunsaturated fats are generally obtained from non-animal 
sources. While they are beneficial for lowering bad cholesterol they 
also lower good cholesterol. They are better for you than saturated 
fats but are not to be consumed in excess. Monounsaturated fats 
are of plant origin and are found in most nuts, seeds, seed oils, olive 
oil, canola oil, and legumes. Monounsaturated fats are excellent 
because they not only lower bad cholesterol, but also they elevate 
the good cholesterol. Replace current dietary fats with an increased 
intake of monounsaturated fats. 
Choose whole-grain and high-fiber foods. Reduced risk for 
cardiovascular disease has been associated with diets that are high 
in whole grains and fiber. Fiber also slows down cholesterol 
absorption. The AHA recommends that at least half of daily grain 
intake should originate from whole grains. The Adequate Intake 
value for fiber is 14 grams per 1,000 kilocalories. These amounts 
are based upon the amount of fiber that has been shown to reduce 
cardiovascular risk. 
Do not be sedentary. Get more exercise on a regular basis. 
Increasing your energy expenditure by just twenty minutes of 
physical activity at least three times per week will improve your 
overall health. Physical exercise can help you manage or prevent 
high blood pressure and blood cholesterol levels. Regular activity 
raises HDL while at the same time decreases triglycerides and 
plaque buildup in the arteries. Calories are burned consistently, 
Lipids and Disease  |  349


making it easier to lose and manage weight. Circulation will 
improve, the body will be better oxygenated, and the heart and 
blood vessels will function more efficiently. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=231 
 
350  |  Lipids and Disease


A Personal Choice about 
Lipids 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
A Guide to Making Sense of Dietary Fat 
On your next trip to the grocery store prepare yourself to read 
all food labels carefully and to seriously consider everything that 
goes into your shopping cart. Create a shopping list and divide your 
list into columns for “Best,” “Better,” “Good,” “Least Desirable,” and 
“Infrequent Foods.” As you refine your sense of dietary fat, here are 
key points to bear in mind: 
• Shopping for groceries. Don’t be bombarded with gratuitous 
grams of saturated fats and empty grams of trans fats. Read 
and decipher food labels carefully so that you know exactly 
what types of fat a food item contains and how much fat it will 
contribute to your overall fat intake. For snacks and daily 
eating, gravitate toward foods that are lowest in or absent of 
harmful trans fats. Restrict other foods to occasional usage 
based upon their fat content. For example, if selecting 
prepared foods, choose the ones without high-fat sauces in 
favor of adding your own flavorings. If selecting precooked 
meats, avoid those that are fried, coated, or prepared in high-
fat sauces. A popular and healthy precooked meat food choice 
is the rotisserie chicken that most supermarkets carry. When 
selecting meats be aware of the need to compare different 
cuts—notice their fat content, color, and marbling. Higher-fat 
meats tend to have whiter fat marbled throughout. Choose 
A Personal Choice about Lipids  |  351


lean cuts and white meat as these are lower in saturated fat. 
Always choose plenty of fresh fruits, vegetables, nuts, and 
seeds, as their phytosterols are a good competitor for 
cholesterol. Keep a collection of nuts in your freezer that can 
be added to your salads, stir-fry, one-dish foods, soups, 
desserts, and yogurts. 
• Appearance. Saturated and trans fats are not good for you and 
must be placed in your “Least Desirable” column because they 
increase cholesterol levels and put you at risk for heart 
disease. Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats are better 
choices to replace these undesirable fats. The key in 
identifying the “Best” or “Better” fats from the “Least Desirable” 
fats while you shop is based upon appearance. When choosing 
fats remember that saturated fats and trans fats are solid at 
room temperature; think of butter. Monounsaturated and 
polyunsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature; think of 
vegetable oil. 
• Try to eliminate as much trans fat as possible from your food 
selections. Avoid commercially baked goods and fast foods. 
Make these your “Infrequent Foods.” 
• Choose unsaturated fats. Fatty fish, walnuts, flaxseeds, 
flaxseed oil, and canola oil all have good health benefits and 
should be on the “Best,” “Better,” and “Good” fat lists. They each 
provide essential omega-3 fatty acids necessary for overall 
body health. To derive the most benefit from including these 
foods, do not add them to an existing diet full of fat. Use these 
to replace the “Least Desirable” fats that are being removed 
from the diet. 
• Limit saturated fat intake. Reduce red meat consumption, 
processed meats, and whole-fat dairy products. To reduce full-
fat dairy items try their low-fat or nonfat counterparts such as 
mozzarella cheese. 
• Low fat does not equal healthy. Remember, a fat-free label 
does not provide you with a license to consume all the calories 
you desire. There will be consequences to your weight and 
352  |  A Personal Choice about Lipids


your overall health. Common replacements for fat in many fat-
free foods are refined carbohydrates, sugar, and calories. Too 
much of these ingredients can also cause health problems. 
Choose and consume wisely. 
• A “better-fat” diet will successfully support weight loss. 
While cutting “Least Desirable” fat calories are vital to weight 
loss, remember that “Better” fats are filling and just a handful 
of nuts can curb an appetite to prevent overeating. 
• Consume omega-3 fats each day. For optimal health and 
disease prevention include a moderate serving of fish, walnuts, 
ground flaxseeds, flaxseed oil, or soybean oil in your diet every 
day. 
• How much saturated fat is too much? Your goal is to keep 
your intake of saturated fat to no more than 10 percent of your 
total dietary calories on a daily basis. Thus, it is important to 
learn to reduce the intake of foods high in saturated fat. High-
fat foods can be consumed but they must fall within the overall 
goal for a person’s fat allowance for the day. 
• Home cooking. Limit the use of saturated fats in home 
preparation of meals. Instead of butter try spreads made from 
unsaturated oils such as canola or olive oils and the use of 
cooking sprays. Couple this with the use of herbs and spices to 
add flavor. Avoid using high-fat meat gravies, cheese, and 
cream sauces. Limit adding extras to foods such as butter on a 
baked potato. Use nonfat sour cream instead. Grill, bake, stir-
fry, roast, or bake your foods. Never fry in solid fats such as 
butter or shortening. Marinate foods to be grilled in fruit juices 
and herbs. Instead of relying upon commercial salad dressings, 
learn to make your own top-quality dressing from cold-
pressed olive oil, flaxseed oil, or sesame oil. 
• Make sure the fat is flavorful. Adding flavor to food is what 
makes the eating experience enjoyable. Why not choose 
unsaturated fats and oils that have strong flavors? In this way 
you will add good flavor to your meals but use less fat in the 
process. Some examples are sesame oil, peanut oil, and peanut 
A Personal Choice about Lipids  |  353


butter. Replace less flavorful cheeses with small amounts of 
strongly flavored cheeses such as romano, parmesan, and 
asiago. 
Now that you have gained a wealth of information and food for 
thought to enable you to make changes to your dietary pattern 
we hope that your desire to pursue a healthier lifestyle has been 
solidified. While we realize that making grand strides in this 
direction may be awkward at first, even the smallest of 
accomplishments can produce noticeable results that will spur you 
on and perhaps spark the interest of friends and family to join you 
in this health crusade. 
Becoming aware of the need to limit your total fat intake will 
facilitate your ability to make better choices. In turn, making better 
dietary choices requires gaining knowledge. As you understand that 
your food choices not only impact your personal physical health but 
also the delicate balance of our ecosystem, we are confident that 
you will successfully adapt to the dynamics of the ever-changing 
global food supply. Remember, the food choices you make today will 
benefit you tomorrow and into the years to come. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
354  |  A Personal Choice about Lipids


Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=233 
 
A Personal Choice about Lipids  |  355




PART VI 
CHAPTER 6. PROTEIN 
Chapter 6. Protein  |  357




Ahi poke by 
Arnold 
Gatilao / CC 
BY 2.0 
Introduction 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
He pūkoʻa kani ʻāina 
A coral reef that grows into an island 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to: 
• 
Describe the role and structure of proteins 
• 
Describe the functions of proteins in the body 
• 
Describe the consequences of protein imbalance 
Introduction  |  359


Protein is a vital constituent of all organs in the body and is required 
to perform a vast variety of functions. Therefore, protein is an 
essential nutrient that must be consumed in the diet. Many Pacific 
Island societies such as the Native Hawaiians accompanied their 
starch meals with some type of meat or seafood. In Hawai‘i, a typical 
meal consisted of taro or poi accompanied with fish. Fish is known 
to be a complete protein source which means that all nine essential 
amino acids are present in the recommended amounts needed. 
Native Hawaiians ate their fish raw, cooked, salted or dried. If the 
fish was to be eaten raw, it was prepared by mashing the flesh with 
the fingers (lomi) to soften the meat and allow the salt to penetrate 
the flesh deeper. If the fish was not soft enough to lomi, it was cut 
into chunks or slices or left whole. Today, the most popular and 
contemporary prepared way of eating fish is known as poke.  Poke, 
which means “cut up pieces” in Hawaiian, is chopped up chunks 
of fish that can be seasoned in a variety of different ways.  Some 
common ways of seasoning include salt, shoyu (soy sauce), limu 
(seaweed), garlic, and onions. Any type of fish can be used to make 
poke but ahi (tuna) fish is typically the most desirable option.1 
Your protein-rich muscles allow for body strength and 
movement, which enable you to enjoy many activities. 
1. Fish Preparation/Eating. HawaiiHistory.org. 
http://www.hawaiihistory.org/index.cfm?PageID=382. 
Updated 2017. Accessed October 30, 2017. 
360  |  Introduction


William 
Hook 
https://unspl
ash.com/
photos/
pa0rr3rVB-
U 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
Introduction  |  361


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=239 
 
362  |  Introduction


Defining Protein 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Protein makes up approximately 20 percent of the human body and 
is present in every single cell. The word protein is a Greek word, 
meaning “of utmost importance.” Proteins are called the workhorses 
of life as they provide the body with structure and perform a vast 
array of functions. You can stand, walk, run, skate, swim, and more 
because of your protein-rich muscles. Protein is necessary for 
proper immune system function, digestion, and hair and nail 
growth, and is involved in numerous other body functions. In fact, 
it is estimated that more than one hundred thousand different 
proteins exist within the human body. In this chapter you will learn 
about the components of protein, the important roles that protein 
serves within the body, how the body uses protein, the risks and 
consequences associated with too much or too little protein, and 
where to find healthy sources of it in your diet. 
What Is Protein? 
Proteins, simply put, are macromolecules composed of amino acids. 
Amino acids are commonly called protein’s building blocks. Proteins 
are crucial for the nourishment, renewal, and continuance of life. 
Proteins contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen just 
as carbohydrates and lipids do, but proteins are the only 
macronutrient that contains nitrogen. In each amino acid the 
elements are arranged into a specific conformation around a carbon 
center. Each amino acid consists of a central carbon atom 
connected to a side chain, a hydrogen, a nitrogen-containing amino 
group, and a carboxylic acid group—hence the name “amino acid.” 
Defining Protein  |  363


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Amino acids differ from each other by which specific side chain is 
bonded to the carbon center. 
Figure 6.1 Amino Acid Structure 
Amino acids contain four elements. The arrangement of elements 
around the carbon center is the same for all amino acids. Only the 
side chain (R) differs. 
It’s All in the Side Chain 
The side chain of an amino acid, sometimes called the “R” group, can 
be as simple as one hydrogen bonded to the carbon center, or as 
complex as a six-carbon ring bonded to the carbon center. Although 
each side chain of the twenty amino acids is unique, there are some 
chemical likenesses among them. Therefore, they can be classified 
into four different groups. These are nonpolar, polar, acidic, and 
basic. 
Figure 6.2 The Different Groups of Amino Acids 
364  |  Defining Protein


Amino acids 
are classified 
into four 
groups. 
These are 
nonpolar, 
polar, acidic, 
and basic. 
Essential and Nonessential Amino Acids 
Amino acids are further classified based on nutritional aspects. 
Recall that there are twenty different amino acids, and we require all 
of them to make the many different proteins found throughout the 
body. Eleven of these are called nonessential amino acids because 
the body can synthesize them. However, nine of the amino acids 
are called essential amino acids because we cannot synthesize them 
either at all or in sufficient amounts. These must be obtained from 
the diet. Sometimes during infancy, growth, and in diseased states 
the body cannot synthesize enough of some of the nonessential 
amino acids and more of them are required in the diet. These types 
of amino acids are called conditionally essential amino acids. The 
nutritional value of a protein is dependent on what amino acids it 
contains and in what quantities. 
Table 6.1 Essential and Nonessential Amino Acids 
Defining Protein  |  365


Essential 
Nonessential 
Histidine 
Alanine 
Isoleucine 
Arginine* 
Leucine 
Asparagine 
Lysine 
Aspartic acid 
Methionine 
Cysteine* 
Phenylalanine 
Glutamic acid 
Threonine 
Glutamine* 
Tryptophan 
Glycine* 
Valine 
Proline* 
Serine 
Tyrosine* 
*Conditionally essential 
The Many Different Types of Proteins 
As discussed, there are over one hundred thousand different 
proteins in the human body. Different proteins are produced 
because there are twenty types of naturally occurring amino acids 
that are combined in unique sequences to form polypeptides. These 
polypeptide chains then fold into a three-dimensional shape to form 
a protein (see Figure 6.3 “Formation of Polypeptides”). Additionally, 
proteins come in many different sizes. The hormone insulin, which 
regulates blood glucose, is composed of only fifty-one amino acids; 
whereas collagen, a protein that acts like glue between cells, 
consists of more than one thousand amino acids. Titin is the largest 
known protein. It accounts for the elasticity of muscles, and consists 
of more than twenty-five thousand amino acids! The abundant 
variations of proteins are due to the unending number of amino acid 
sequences that can be formed. To compare how so many different 
proteins can be designed from only twenty amino acids, think about 
366  |  Defining Protein


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
music. All of the music that exists in the world has been derived 
from a basic set of seven notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B and variations 
thereof. As a result, there is a vast array of music and songs all 
composed of specific sequences from these basic musical notes. 
Similarly, the twenty amino acids can be linked together in an 
extraordinary number of sequences, much more than are possible 
for the seven musical notes to create songs. As a result, there are 
enormous variations and potential amino acid sequences that can 
be created. For example, if an amino acid sequence for a protein 
is 104 amino acids long the possible combinations of amino acid 
sequences is equal to 20104, which is 2 followed by 135 zeros! 
Figure 6.3 The Formation of Polypeptides 
Building Proteins with Amino Acids 
The building of a protein consists of a complex series of chemical 
Defining Protein  |  367


reactions that can be summarized into three basic steps: 
transcription, translation, and protein folding. The first step in 
constructing a protein is the transcription (copying) of the genetic 
information in double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) into 
the single-stranded, messenger macromolecule ribonucleic acid 
(RNA). RNA is chemically similar to DNA, but has two differences; 
one is that its backbone uses the sugar ribose and not deoxyribose; 
and two, it contains the nucleotide base uracil, and not thymidine. 
The RNA that is transcribed from a given piece of DNA contains the 
same information as that DNA, but it is now in a form that can be 
read by the cellular protein manufacturer known as the ribosome. 
Next, the RNA instructs the cells to gather all the necessary amino 
acids and add them to the growing protein chain in a very specific 
order. This process is referred to as translation. The decoding of 
genetic information to synthesize a protein is the central foundation 
of modern biology. 
Figure 6.4 Steps for Building a Protein 
368  |  Defining Protein


Building a protein involves three steps: transcription, translation, 
Defining Protein  |  369


and folding. During translation each amino acid is connected to the 
next amino acid by a special chemical bond called a peptide bond. 
The peptide bond forms between the carboxylic acid group of one 
amino acid and the amino group of another, releasing a molecule 
of water. The third step in protein production involves folding it 
into its correct shape. Specific amino acid sequences contain all 
the information necessary to spontaneously fold into a particular 
shape. A change in the amino acid sequence will cause a change in 
protein shape. Each protein in the human body differs in its amino 
acid sequence and consequently, its shape. The newly synthesized 
protein is structured to perform a particular function in a cell. 
A protein made with an incorrectly placed amino acid may not 
function properly and this can sometimes cause disease. 
Protein Organization 
Protein’s structure enables it to perform a variety of functions. 
Proteins are similar to carbohydrates and lipids in that they are 
polymers of simple repeating units; however, proteins are much 
more structurally complex. In contrast to carbohydrates, which 
have identical repeating units, proteins are made up of amino acids 
that are different from one another. Furthermore, a protein is 
organized into four different structural levels. 
Primary: The first level is the one-dimensional sequence of amino 
acids that are held together by peptide bonds. Carbohydrates and 
lipids also are one-dimensional sequences of their respective 
monomers, which may be branched, coiled, fibrous, or globular, but 
their conformation is much more random and is not organized by 
their sequence of monomers. 
Secondary: The second level of protein structure is dependent 
on the chemical interactions between amino acids, which cause the 
protein to fold into a specific shape, such as a helix (like a coiled 
spring) or sheet. 
370  |  Defining Protein


Tertiary: The third level of protein structure is three-
dimensional. As the different side chains of amino acids chemically 
interact, they either repel or attract each other, resulting in the 
folded structure. Thus, the specific sequence of amino acids in a 
protein directs the protein to fold into a specific, organized shape. 
Quaternary:  The fourth level of structure is achieved when 
protein fragments called peptides combine to make one larger 
functional protein. The protein hemoglobin is an example of a 
protein that has quaternary structure. It is composed of four 
peptides that bond together to form a functional oxygen carrier. 
A protein’s structure also influences its nutritional quality. Large 
fibrous protein structures are more difficult to digest than smaller 
proteins and some, such as keratin, are indigestible. Because 
digestion of some fibrous proteins is incomplete, not all of the 
amino acids are absorbed and available for the body to utilize, 
thereby decreasing their nutritional value. 
Figure 6.5 The Four Structural Levels of Proteins 
Defining Protein  |  371


Image by 
OpenStax / 
CC BY 4.0 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
372  |  Defining Protein


available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=246 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=246 
Defining Protein  |  373


The Role of Proteins in 
Foods: Cooking and 
Denaturation 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
In addition to having many vital functions within the body, proteins 
perform different roles in our foods by adding certain functional 
qualities to them. Protein provides food with structure and texture 
and enables water retention. For example, proteins foam when 
agitated. (Picture whisking egg whites to make angel food cake. The 
foam bubbles are what give the angel food cake its airy texture.) 
Yogurt is another good example of proteins providing texture. Milk 
proteins called caseins coagulate, increasing yogurt’s thickness. 
Cooked proteins add some color and flavor to foods as the amino 
group binds with carbohydrates and produces a brown pigment and 
aroma. Eggs are between 10 and 15 percent protein by weight. Most 
cake recipes use eggs because the egg proteins help bind all the 
other ingredients together into a uniform cake batter. The proteins 
aggregate into a network during mixing and baking that gives cake 
structure. 
374  |  The Role of Proteins in Foods:
Cooking and Denaturation


Image by 
Annie Spratt 
on 
unspash.com 
/ CC0 
Protein Denaturation: Unraveling the Fold 
When a cake is baked, the proteins are denatured. Denaturation 
refers to the physical changes that take place in a protein exposed 
to abnormal conditions in the environment. Heat, acid, high salt 
concentrations, alcohol, and mechanical agitation can cause 
proteins to denature. When a protein denatures, its complicated 
folded structure unravels, and it becomes just a long strand of 
amino acids again. Weak chemical forces that hold tertiary and 
secondary protein structures together are broken when a protein 
is exposed to unnatural conditions. Because proteins’ function is 
dependent on their shape, denatured proteins are no longer 
functional. During cooking the applied heat causes proteins to 
vibrate. This destroys the weak bonds holding proteins in their 
complex shape (though this does not happen to the stronger 
peptide bonds). The unraveled protein strands then stick together, 
forming an aggregate (or network). 
The Role of Proteins in Foods: Cooking and Denaturation  |  375


When a 
protein is 
exposed to a 
different 
environment
, such as 
increased 
temperature, 
it unfolds 
into a single 
strand of 
amino acids. 
Figure 6.6 Protein Denaturation 
 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
376  |  The Role of Proteins in Foods: Cooking and Denaturation


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=250 
 
The Role of Proteins in Foods: Cooking and Denaturation  |  377


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Protein Digestion and 
Absorption 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
How do the proteins from foods, denatured or not, get processed 
into amino acids that cells can use to make new proteins? When you 
eat food the body’s digestive system breaks down the protein into 
the individual amino acids, which are absorbed and used by cells to 
build other proteins and a few other macromolecules, such as DNA. 
We previously discussed the general process of food digestion,  let’s 
follow the specific path that proteins take down the gastrointestinal 
tract and into the circulatory system (Figure 6.7 “Digestion and 
Absorption of Protein”). Eggs are a good dietary source of protein 
and will be used as our example to describe the path of proteins 
in the processes of digestion and absorption. One egg, whether 
raw, hard-boiled, scrambled, or fried, supplies about six grams of 
protein. 
Figure 6.7 Digestion and Absorption of Protein 
378  |  Protein Digestion and
Absorption


From the Mouth to the Stomach 
Unless you are eating it raw, the first step in egg digestion (or 
any other protein food) involves chewing. The teeth begin the 
mechanical breakdown of the large egg pieces into smaller pieces 
that can be swallowed. The salivary glands provide some saliva to 
aid swallowing and the passage of the partially mashed egg through 
the esophagus. The mashed egg pieces enter the stomach through 
the esophageal sphincter. The stomach releases gastric juices 
containing hydrochloric acid and the enzyme, pepsin, which initiate 
the breakdown of the protein. The acidity of the stomach facilitates 
the unfolding of the proteins that still retain part of their three-
dimensional structure after cooking and helps break down the 
protein aggregates formed during cooking. Pepsin, which is 
secreted by the cells that line the stomach, dismantles the protein 
chains into smaller and smaller fragments. Egg proteins are large 
globular molecules and their chemical breakdown requires time 
and mixing. The powerful mechanical stomach contractions churn 
the partially digested protein into a more uniform mixture called 
chyme. Protein digestion in the stomach takes a longer time than 
carbohydrate digestion, but a shorter time than fat digestion. Eating 
a high-protein meal increases the amount of time required to 
sufficiently break down the meal in the stomach. Food remains in 
the stomach longer, making you feel full longer. 
From the Stomach to the Small Intestine 
The stomach empties the chyme containing the broken down egg 
pieces into the small intestine, where the majority of protein 
digestion occurs. The pancreas secretes digestive juice that 
contains more enzymes that further break down the protein 
fragments. The two major pancreatic enzymes that digest proteins 
Protein Digestion and Absorption  |  379


are chymotrypsin and trypsin. The cells that line the small intestine 
release additional enzymes that finally break apart the smaller 
protein fragments into the individual amino acids. The muscle 
contractions of the small intestine mix and propel the digested 
proteins to the absorption sites. In the lower parts of the small 
intestine, the amino acids are transported from the intestinal lumen 
through the intestinal cells to the blood. This movement of 
individual amino acids requires special transport proteins and the 
cellular energy molecule, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Once the 
amino acids are in the blood, they are transported to the liver. As 
with other macronutrients, the liver is the checkpoint for amino 
acid distribution and any further breakdown of amino acids, which 
is very minimal. Recall that amino acids contain nitrogen, so further 
catabolism of amino acids releases nitrogen-containing ammonia. 
Because ammonia is toxic, the liver transforms it into urea, which 
is then transported to the kidney and excreted in the urine. Urea 
is a molecule that contains two nitrogens and is highly soluble in 
water. This makes it a good choice for transporting excess nitrogen 
out of the body. Because amino acids are building blocks that the 
body reserves in order to synthesize other proteins, more than 90 
percent of the protein ingested does not get broken down further 
than the amino acid monomers. 
Amino Acids Are Recycled 
Just as some plastics can be recycled to make new products, amino 
acids are recycled to make new proteins. All cells in the body 
continually break down proteins and build new ones, a process 
referred to as protein turnover. Every day over 250 grams of protein 
in your body are dismantled and 250 grams of new protein are 
built. To form these new proteins, amino acids from food and those 
from protein destruction are placed into a “pool.” Though it is not 
a literal pool, when an amino acid is required to build another 
380  |  Protein Digestion and Absorption


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
protein it can be acquired from the additional amino acids that exist 
within the body. Amino acids are used not only to build proteins, 
but also to build other biological molecules containing nitrogen, 
such as DNA, RNA, and to some extent to produce energy. It is 
critical to maintain amino acid levels within this cellular pool by 
consuming high-quality proteins in the diet, or the amino acids 
needed for building new proteins will be obtained by increasing 
protein destruction from other tissues within the body, especially 
muscle. This amino acid pool is less than one percent of total body-
protein content. Thus, the body does not store protein as it does 
with carbohydrates (as glycogen in the muscles and liver) and lipids 
(as triglycerides in adipose tissue). 
Figure 6.8 Options For Amino Acid Use In The Human Body 
Amino acids in the cellular pool come from dietary protein and from 
the destruction of cellular proteins. The amino acids in this pool 
need to be replenished because amino acids are outsourced to make 
new proteins, energy, and other biological molecules. 
Protein Digestion and Absorption  |  381


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=254 
 
382  |  Protein Digestion and Absorption


Proteins are 
the 
“workhorses” 
of the body 
and 
participate 
in many 
bodily 
functions. 
Proteins 
come in all 
sizes and 
shapes and 
each is 
specifically 
structured 
for its 
particular 
function. 
Protein’s Functions in the 
Body 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
Structure and Motion 
Figure 6.9 Collagen Structure 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  383


Collagen 
Triple Helix 
by Nevit 
Dilmen / CC 
BY-SA 3.0 
More than one hundred different structural proteins have been 
discovered in the human body, but the most abundant by far is 
collagen, which makes up about 6 percent of total body weight. 
Collagen makes up 30 percent of bone tissue and comprises large 
amounts of tendons, ligaments, cartilage, skin, and muscle. Collagen 
is a strong, fibrous protein made up of mostly glycine and proline. 
Within its quaternary structure three peptide strands twist around 
each other like a rope and then these collagen ropes overlap with 
others. This highly ordered structure is even stronger than steel 
fibers of the same size. Collagen makes bones strong, but flexible. 
Collagen fibers in the skin’s dermis provide it with structure, and the 
accompanying elastin protein fibrils make it flexible. Pinch the skin 
on your hand and then let go; the collagen and elastin proteins in 
skin allow it to go back to its original shape. Smooth-muscle cells 
that secrete collagen and elastin proteins surround blood vessels, 
providing the vessels with structure and the ability to stretch back 
after blood is pumped through them. Another strong, fibrous 
protein is keratin, which is what skin, hair, and nails are made 
of. The closely packed collagen fibrils in tendons and ligaments 
allow for synchronous mechanical movements of bones and muscle 
384  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


and the ability of these tissues to spring back after a movement is 
complete. 
Enzymes 
Although proteins are found in the greatest amounts in connective 
tissues such as bone, their most extraordinary function is as 
enzymes. Enzymes are proteins that conduct specific chemical 
reactions. An enzyme’s job is to provide a site for a chemical 
reaction and to lower the amount of energy and time it takes for 
that chemical reaction to happen (this is known as “catalysis”). On 
average, more than one hundred chemical reactions occur in cells 
every single second and most of them require enzymes. The liver 
alone contains over one thousand enzyme systems. Enzymes are 
specific and will use only particular substrates that fit into their 
active site, similar to the way a lock can be opened only with a 
specific key. Nearly every chemical reaction requires a specific 
enzyme. Fortunately, an enzyme can fulfill its role as a catalyst 
over and over again, although eventually it is destroyed and rebuilt. 
All bodily functions, including the breakdown of nutrients in the 
stomach and small intestine, the transformation of nutrients into 
molecules a cell can use, and building all macromolecules, including 
protein itself, involve enzymes (see Figure 6.10 “Enzymes Role in 
Carbohydrate Digestion”). 
 
Figure 6.10 Enzymes Role in Carbohydrate Digestion 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  385


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Hormones 
Proteins are responsible for hormone synthesis. Hormones are the 
chemical messages produced by the endocrine glands. When an 
endocrine gland is stimulated, it releases a hormone. The hormone 
is then transported in the blood to its target cell, where it 
communicates a message to initiate a specific reaction or cellular 
process. For instance, after you eat a meal, your blood glucose 
levels rise. In response to the increased blood glucose, the pancreas 
releases the hormone insulin. Insulin tells the cells of the body that 
glucose is available and to take it up from the blood and store it 
or use it for making energy or building macromolecules. A major 
function of hormones is to turn enzymes on and off, so some 
proteins can even regulate the actions of other proteins. While not 
all hormones are made from proteins, many of them are. 
Fluid and Acid-Base Balance 
Proper protein intake enables the basic biological processes of the 
body to maintain the status quo in a changing environment. Fluid 
balance refers to maintaining the distribution of water in the body. 
386  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


PDB 1o9x EBI 
by Jawahar 
Swaminatha
n and MSD 
staff at the 
European 
Bioinformati
cs Institute / 
Public 
Domain The 
butterfly-sha
ped protein, 
albumin, has 
many 
functions in 
the body 
including 
maintaining 
fluid and 
acid-base 
balance and 
transporting 
molecules. 
If too much water in the blood suddenly moves into a tissue, the 
results are swelling and, potentially, cell death. Water always flows 
from an area of high concentration to one of a low concentration. As 
a result, water moves toward areas that have higher concentrations 
of other solutes, such as proteins and glucose. To keep the water 
evenly distributed between blood and cells, proteins continuously 
circulate at high concentrations in the blood. The most abundant 
protein in blood is the butterfly-shaped protein known as albumin. 
Albumin’s presence in the blood makes the protein concentration in 
the blood similar to that in cells. Therefore, fluid exchange between 
the blood and cells is not in the extreme, but rather is minimized to 
preserve the status quo. 
Figure 6.11 The Protein Albumin 
Protein is also essential in maintaining proper pH balance (the 
measure of how acidic or basic a substance is) in the blood. Blood 
pH is maintained between 7.35 and 7.45, which is slightly basic. 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  387


Even a slight change in blood pH can affect body functions. Recall 
that acidic conditions can cause protein denaturation, which stops 
proteins from functioning. The body has several systems that hold 
the blood pH within the normal range to prevent this from 
happening. One of these is the circulating albumin. Albumin is 
slightly acidic, and because it is negatively charged it balances the 
many positively charged molecules, such as protons (H+), calcium, 
potassium, and magnesium which are also circulating in the blood. 
Albumin acts as a buffer against abrupt changes in the 
concentrations of these molecules, thereby balancing blood pH and 
maintaining the status quo. The protein hemoglobin also 
participates in acid-base balance by binding and releasing protons. 
Transport 
Albumin and hemoglobin also play a role in molecular transport. 
Albumin chemically binds to hormones, fatty acids, some vitamins, 
essential minerals, and drugs, and transports them throughout the 
circulatory system. Each red blood cell contains millions of 
hemoglobin molecules that bind oxygen in the lungs and transport it 
to all the tissues in the body. A cell’s plasma membrane is usually not 
permeable to large polar molecules, so to get the required nutrients 
and molecules into the cell many transport proteins exist in the 
cell membrane. Some of these proteins are channels that allow 
particular molecules to move in and out of cells. Others act as one-
way taxis and require energy to function. 
Protection 
Figure 6.12 Antibody Proteins 
388  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


Abagovomab 
(monoclonal 
antibody) by 
Blake C / CC 
BY-SA 3.0 
Figure 6.13 Antigens 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  389


Antibody 
chains by 
Fred the 
Oyster / 
Public 
Domain 
An antibody protein is made up of two heavy chains and two light 
chains. The variable region, which differs from one antibody to the 
next, allows an antibody to recognize its matching antigen. 
Earlier we discussed that the strong collagen fibers in skin 
provide it with structure and support. The skin’s dense network 
of collagen fibers also serves as a barricade against harmful 
substances. The immune system’s attack and destroy functions are 
dependent on enzymes and antibodies, which are also proteins. 
390  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


An enzyme called lysozyme is secreted in the saliva and attacks 
the walls of bacteria, causing them to rupture. Certain proteins 
circulating in the blood can be directed to build a molecular knife 
that stabs the cellular membranes of foreign invaders. The 
antibodies secreted by the white blood cells survey the entire 
circulatory system looking for harmful bacteria and viruses to 
surround and destroy. Antibodies also trigger other factors in the 
immune system to seek and destroy unwanted intruders. 
Wound Healing and Tissue Regeneration 
Proteins are involved in all aspects of wound healing, a process 
that takes place in three phases: inflammatory, proliferative, and 
remodeling. For example, if you were sewing and pricked your 
finger with a needle, your flesh would turn red and become 
inflamed. Within a few seconds bleeding would stop. The healing 
process begins with proteins such as bradykinin, which dilate blood 
vessels at the site of injury. An additional protein called fibrin helps 
to secure platelets that form a clot to stop the bleeding. Next, in 
the proliferative phase, cells move in and mend the injured tissue by 
installing newly made collagen fibers. The collagen fibers help pull 
the wound edges together. In the remodeling phase, more collagen 
is deposited, forming a scar. Scar tissue is only about 80 percent 
as functional as normal uninjured tissue. If a diet is insufficient in 
protein, the process of wound healing is markedly slowed. 
While wound healing takes place only after an injury is sustained, 
a different process called tissue regeneration is ongoing in the body. 
The 
main 
difference 
between 
wound 
healing 
and 
tissue 
regeneration is in the process of regenerating an exact structural 
and functional copy of the lost tissue. Thus, old, dying tissue is 
not replaced with scar tissue but with brand new, fully functional 
tissue. Some cells (such as skin, hair, nails, and intestinal cells) have 
a very high rate of regeneration, while others, (such as heart-muscle 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  391


cells and nerve cells) do not regenerate at any appreciable levels. 
Tissue regeneration is the creation of new cells (cell division), which 
requires many different proteins including enzymes that synthesize 
RNA and proteins, transport proteins, hormones, and collagen. In 
a hair follicle, cells divide and a hair grows in length. Hair growth 
averages 1 centimeter per month and fingernails about 1 centimeter 
every one hundred days. The cells lining the intestine regenerate 
every three to five days. Protein-inadequate diets impair tissue 
regeneration, causing many health problems including impairment 
of nutrient digestion and absorption and, most visibly, hair and nail 
growth. 
Energy Production 
Some of the amino acids in proteins can be disassembled and used 
to make energy (Figure 6.14 “Amino Acids Used for Energy”). Only 
about 10 percent of dietary proteins are catabolized each day to 
make cellular energy. The liver is able to break down amino acids 
to the carbon skeleton, which can then be fed into the citric acid 
cycle. This is similar to the way that glucose is used to make ATP. If a 
person’s diet does not contain enough carbohydrates and fats their 
body will use more amino acids to make energy, which compromises 
the synthesis of new proteins and destroys muscle proteins. 
Alternatively, if a person’s diet contains more protein than the body 
needs, the extra amino acids will be broken down and transformed 
into fat. 
 
Figure 6.14 Amino Acids Used for Energy 
392  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


Image by 
Allison 
Calabrese / 
CC BY 4.0 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
Protein’s Functions in the Body  |  393


An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=263 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=263 
394  |  Protein’s Functions in the Body


Diseases Involving Proteins 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
As you may recall, moderation refers to having the proper amount 
of a nutrient—having neither too little nor too much. A healthy diet 
incorporates all nutrients in moderation. Low protein intake has 
several health consequences, and a severe lack of protein in the 
diet eventually causes death. Although severe protein deficiency is 
a rare occurrence in children and adults in the United States, it 
is estimated that more than half of the elderly in nursing homes 
are protein-deficient. The Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution 
Range (AMDR) for protein for adults is between 10 and 35 percent 
of kilocalories, which is a fairly wide range. The percent of protein 
in the diet that is associated with malnutrition and its health 
consequences is less than 10 percent, but this is often accompanied 
by deficiencies in calories and other micronutrients. In this section 
we will discuss the health consequences of protein intake that is 
either too low to support life’s processes or too high, thereby 
increasing the risk of chronic disease. In the last section of this 
chapter, we will discuss in more detail the personal choices you can 
make to optimize your health by consuming the right amount of 
high-quality protein. 
Health Consequences of Protein Deficiency 
Although severe protein deficiency is rare in the developed world, it 
is a leading cause of death in children in many poor, underdeveloped 
countries. There are two main syndromes associated with protein 
deficiencies: Kwashiorkor and Marasmus. Kwashiorkor affects 
millions of children worldwide. When it was first described in 1935, 
Diseases Involving Proteins  |  395


more than 90 percent of children with Kwashiorkor died. Although 
the associated mortality is slightly lower now, most children still 
die after the initiation of treatment. The name Kwashiorkor comes 
from a language in Ghana and means, “rejected one.” The syndrome 
was named because it occurred most commonly in children who 
had recently been weaned from the breast, usually because another 
child had just been born. Subsequently the child was fed watery 
porridge made from low-protein grains, which accounts for the low 
protein intake. Kwashiorkor is characterized by swelling (edema) of 
the feet and abdomen, poor skin health, growth retardation, low 
muscle mass, and liver malfunction. Recall that one of protein’s 
functional roles in the body is fluid balance. Diets extremely low 
in protein do not provide enough amino acids for the synthesis 
of albumin. One of the functions of albumin is to hold water in 
the blood vessels, so having lower concentrations of blood albumin 
results in water moving out of the blood vessels and into tissues, 
causing swelling. The primary symptoms of Kwashiorkor include not 
only swelling, but also diarrhea, fatigue, peeling skin, and irritability. 
Severe protein deficiency in addition to other micronutrient 
deficiencies, such as folate (vitamin B9), iodine, iron, and vitamin C 
all contribute to the many health manifestations of this syndrome. 
Figure 6.15 A Young Boy With Kwashiorkor 
396  |  Diseases Involving Proteins


Source: 
Photo 
courtesy of 
the Centers 
for Disease 
Control and 
Prevention 
(CDC). 
Kwashiorkor is a disease brought on by a severe dietary protein 
deficiency. Symptoms include edema of legs and feet, light-colored, 
thinning hair, anemia, a pot-belly, and shiny skin. 
Children and adults with marasmus neither have enough protein 
in their diets nor do they take in enough calories. Marasmus affects 
mostly children below the age of one in poor countries. Body 
weights of children with Marasmus may be up to 80 percent less 
than that of a normal child of the same age. Marasmus is a Greek 
Diseases Involving Proteins  |  397


Japanese 
nurse with 
dependent 
children 
having 
typical 
appearance 
of 
malnutrition
, New Bilibid 
Prison, 
September-O
ctober 1945 
by Unknown 
/ Public 
Domain 
word, meaning “starvation.” The syndrome affects more than fifty 
million children under age five worldwide. It is characterized by 
an extreme emaciated appearance, poor skin health, and growth 
retardation. The symptoms are acute fatigue, hunger, and diarrhea. 
Figure 6.16 Children With Marasmus 
Kwashiorkor and marasmus often coexist as a combined syndrome 
termed marasmic kwashiorkor. Children with the combined 
syndrome 
have 
variable 
amounts 
of 
edema 
and 
the 
characterizations and symptoms of marasmus. Although organ 
system function is compromised by undernutrition, the ultimate 
cause of death is usually infection. Undernutrition is intricately 
linked with suppression of the immune system at multiple levels, so 
undernourished children commonly die from severe diarrhea and/
or pneumonia resulting from bacterial or viral infection. The United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the most prominent agency with 
the mission of changing the world to improve children’s lives, 
reports that undernutrition causes at least one-third of deaths of 
398  |  Diseases Involving Proteins


Figure 6.17 
Causes Of 
Death For 
Children 
Under The 
Age Of Five, 
Worldwide 
young children. As of 2008, the prevalence of children under age 
five who were underweight was 26 percent. The percentage of 
underweight children has declined less than 5 percent in the last 
eighteen years despite the Millennium Development Goal of halving 
the proportion of people who suffer from hunger by the year 2015. 
Figure 6.17 Causes Of Death For Children Under The Age Of Five, 
Worldwide 
Health Consequences of Too Much Protein in the 
Diet 
An explicit definition of a high-protein diet has not yet been 
developed by the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of 
Medicine (IOM), but typically diets high in protein are considered 
Diseases Involving Proteins  |  399


as those that derive more than 30 percent of calories from protein. 
Many people follow high-protein diets because marketers tout 
protein’s ability to stimulate weight loss. It is true that following 
high-protein diets increases weight loss in some people. However 
the number of individuals that remain on this type of diet is low 
and many people who try the diet and stop regain the weight they 
had lost. Additionally, there is a scientific hypothesis that there may 
be health consequences of remaining on high-protein diets for the 
long-term, but clinical trials are ongoing or scheduled to examine 
this hypothesis further. As the high-protein diet trend arose so 
did the intensely debated issue of whether there are any health 
consequences of eating too much protein. Observational studies 
conducted in the general population suggest diets high in animal 
protein, specifically those in which the primary protein source is 
red meat, are linked to a higher risk for kidney stones, kidney 
disease, liver malfunction, colorectal cancer, and osteoporosis. 
However, diets that include lots of red meat are also high in 
saturated fat and cholesterol and sometimes linked to unhealthy 
lifestyles, so it is difficult to conclude that the high protein content 
is the culprit. 
High protein diets appear to only increase the progression of 
kidney disease and liver malfunction in people who already have 
kidney or liver malfunction, and not to cause these problems. 
However, the prevalence of kidney disorders is relatively high and 
underdiagnosed. In regard to colon cancer, an assessment of more 
than ten studies performed around the world published in the June 
2011 issue of PLoS purports that a high intake of red meat and 
processed meat is associated with a significant increase in colon 
cancer risk.1Although there are a few ideas, the exact mechanism of 
1. Chan DS, Lau R, et al. (2011). Red and Processed Meat and 
Colorectal Cancer Incidence: Meta-Analysis of 
Prospective Studies. PLoS One, 6(6), e20456. 
400  |  Diseases Involving Proteins


how proteins, specifically those in red and processed meats, causes 
colon cancer is not known and requires further study. 
Some scientists hypothesize that high-protein diets may 
accelerate bone-tissue loss because under some conditions the 
acids in protein block absorption of calcium in the gut, and, once 
in the blood, amino acids promote calcium loss from bone; however 
even these effects have not been consistently observed in scientific 
studies. Results from the Nurses’ Health Study suggest that women 
who eat more than 95 grams of protein each day have a 20 percent 
higher risk for wrist fracture.23 
Other studies have not produced consistent results. The scientific 
data on high protein diets and increased risk for osteoporosis 
remains highly controversial and more research is needed to come 
to any conclusions about the association between the two.4 
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020456. 
Accessed September 30, 2017. 
2. Protein: The Bottom Line. Harvard School of Public 
Health.The Nutrition Source. 
http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/what-
should-you-eat/protein/.Published 2012. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
3. Barzel US, Massey LK. (1998). Excess Dietary Protein Can 
Adversely Affect Bone. Journal of Nutrition, 128(6), 
1051–53. http://jn.nutrition.org/content/128/6/
1051.long. Accessed September 28, 2017. 
4. St. Jeor ST, et al.(2001). Dietary Protein and Weight 
Reduction: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals 
from the Nutrition Committee of the Council on 
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism of the 
American Heart Association. Circulation, 104, 1869–74. 
Diseases Involving Proteins  |  401


High-protein diets can restrict other essential nutrients. The 
American Heart Association (AHA) states that “High-protein diets 
are not recommended because they restrict healthful foods that 
provide essential nutrients and do not provide the variety of foods 
needed to adequately meet nutritional needs. Individuals who follow 
these diets are therefore at risk for compromised vitamin and 
mineral intake, as well as potential cardiac, renal, bone, and liver 
abnormalities overall.”5 
As with any nutrient, protein must be eaten in proper amounts. 
Moderation and variety are key strategies to achieving a healthy diet 
and need to be considered when optimizing protein intake. While 
the scientific community continues its debate about the particulars 
regarding the health consequences of too much protein in the diet, 
you may be wondering just how much protein you should consume 
to be healthy. Read on to find out more about calculating your 
dietary protein recommendations, dietary protein sources, and 
personal choices about protein. 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/
pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11591629. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
5. St. Jeor ST, et al. (2001). Dietary Protein and Weight 
Reduction: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals 
from the Nutrition Committee of the Council on 
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism of the 
American Heart Association. Circulation, 104, 1869–74. 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/
pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11591629. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
402  |  Diseases Involving Proteins


Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=268 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
Diseases Involving Proteins  |  403


view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=268 
404  |  Diseases Involving Proteins


Image by 
Braden 
Collum on 
unsplash.co
m / CC0 
Proteins in a Nutshell 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
 
Proteins are long chains of amino acids folded into precise 
structures that determine their functions, which are in the tens of 
thousands. They are the primary construction materials of the body 
serving as building blocks for bone, skin, hair, muscle, hormones, 
and antibodies. Without them we cannot breakdown or build 
macromolecules, grow, or heal from a wound. Too little protein 
impairs bodily functions and too much can lead to chronic disease. 
Eat proteins in moderation, at least 10 percent of the calories you 
take in and not more than 35 percent. Proteins are in a variety 
of foods. More complete sources are in animal-based foods, but 
choose those low in saturated fat and cholesterol. Some plant-based 
foods are also complete protein sources and don’t add much to your 
saturated fat or cholesterol intake. Incomplete protein sources can 
easily be combined in the daily diet and provide all of the essential 
Proteins in a Nutshell  |  405


amino acids at adequate levels. Growing children and the elderly 
need to ensure they get enough protein in their diet to help build 
and maintain muscle strength. Even if you’re a hardcore athlete, get 
your proteins from nutrient-dense foods as you need more than 
just protein to power up for an event. Nuts are one nutrient-dense 
food with a whole lot of protein. One ounce of pistachios, which 
is about fifty nuts, has the same amount of protein as an egg and 
contains a lot of vitamins, minerals, healthy polyunsaturated fats, 
and antioxidants. Moreover, the FDA says that eating one ounce of 
nuts per day can lower your risk for heart disease. Can you be a 
hardcore athlete and a vegetarian? 
The analysis of vegetarian diets by the Dietary Guidelines 
Advisory Committee (DGAC) did not find professional athletes were 
inadequate in any nutrients, but did state that people who obtain 
proteins solely from plants should make sure they consume foods 
with vitamin B12, vitamin D, calcium, omega-3 fatty acids, and 
choline. Iron and zinc may also be of concern especially for female 
athletes. Being a vegetarian athlete requires that you pay more 
attention to what you eat, however this is also a true statement for 
all athletes. For an exhaustive list that provides the protein, calcium, 
cholesterol, fat, and fiber content, as well as the number of calories, 
of numerous foods, go to the website, http://www.soystache.com/
protein.htm. 
Everyday Connection 
Getting All the Nutrients You Need—The Plant-Based 
Way 
Below are five ways to assure you are getting all the 
nutrients needed on a plant-based diet; 
406  |  Proteins in a Nutshell


• 
Get your protein from foods such as soybeans, tofu, 
tempeh, lentils, and beans, beans, and more beans. 
Many of these foods are high in zinc too. 
• 
Eat foods fortified with vitamins B12 and D and 
calcium. Some examples are soy milk and fortified 
cereals. 
• 
Get enough iron in your diet by eating kidney 
beans, lentils, whole-grain cereals, and leafy green 
vegetables. 
• 
To increase iron absorption, eat foods with vitamin 
C at the same time. 
• 
Don’t forget that carbohydrates and fats are 
required in your diet too, especially if you are 
training. Eat whole-grain breads, cereals, and pastas. 
For fats, eat an avocado, add some olive oil to a salad 
or stir-fry, or spread some peanut or cashew butter 
on a bran muffin. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Proteins in a Nutshell  |  407


Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=271 
 
408  |  Proteins in a Nutshell


Proteins, Diet, and Personal 
Choices 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA FOOD SCIENCE AND HUMAN 
NUTRITION PROGRAM AND HUMAN NUTRITION PROGRAM 
We have discussed what proteins are, how they are made, how they 
are digested and absorbed, the many functions of proteins in the 
body, and the consequences of having too little or too much protein 
in the diet. This section will provide you with information on how to 
determine the recommended amount of protein for you, and your 
many choices in designing an optimal diet with high-quality protein 
sources. 
How Much Protein Does a Person Need in Their 
Diet? 
The recommendations set by the IOM for the Recommended Daily 
Allowance (RDA) and AMDR for protein for different age groups 
are listed in Table 6.2 “Dietary Reference Intakes for Protein”. A 
Tolerable Upper Intake Limit for protein has not been set, but it is 
recommended that you do not exceed the upper end of the AMDR. 
Table 6.2 Dietary Reference Intakes for Protein 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal
Choices  |  409


Age Group 
RDA (g/day) AMDR (% calories) 
Infants (0–6 mo) 
9.1* 
Not determined 
Infants (7–12 mo) 
11.0 
Not determined 
Children (1–3) 
13.0 
5–20 
Children (4–8) 
19.0 
10–30 
Children (9–13) 
34.0 
10–30 
Males (14–18) 
52.0 
10–30 
Females (14–18) 
46.0 
10–30 
Adult Males (19+) 
56.0 
10–35 
Adult Females (19+) 
46.0 
10–35 
* Denotes Adequate Intake 
Source: Dietary Reference Intakes: Macronutrients. Dietary 
Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, 
Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Institute of Medicine. 
September 5, 2002. Accessed September 28, 2017. 
Protein Input = Protein Used by the Body + Protein Excreted 
The appropriate amount of protein in a person’s diet is that which 
maintains a balance between what is taken in and what is used. The 
RDAs for protein were determined by assessing nitrogen balance. 
Nitrogen is one of the four basic elements contained in all amino 
acids. When proteins are broken down and amino acids are 
catabolized, nitrogen is released. Remember that when the liver 
breaks down amino acids, it produces ammonia, which is rapidly 
converted to nontoxic, nitrogen-containing urea, which is then 
transported to the kidneys for excretion. Most nitrogen is lost as 
urea in the urine, but urea is also excreted in the feces. Proteins are 
also lost in sweat and as hair and nails grow. The RDA, therefore, 
is the amount of protein a person should consume in their diet to 
balance the amount of protein used up and lost from the body. For 
healthy adults, this amount of protein was determined to be 0.8 
grams of protein per kilogram of body weight. You can calculate 
410  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


your exact recommended protein intake per day based on your 
weight by using the following equation: 
(Weight in lbs. ÷ 2.2 lb/kg) × 0.8 g/kg 
Note that if a person is overweight, the amount of dietary protein 
recommended can be overestimated. 
The IOM used data from multiple studies that determined 
nitrogen balance in people of different age groups to calculate the 
RDA for protein. A person is said to be in nitrogen balance when the 
nitrogen input equals the amount of nitrogen used and excreted. A 
person is in negative nitrogen balance when the amount of excreted 
nitrogen is greater than that consumed, meaning that the body is 
breaking down more protein to meet its demands. This state of 
imbalance can occur in people who have certain diseases, such 
as cancer or muscular dystrophy. Someone who has a low-protein 
diet may also be in negative nitrogen balance as they are taking in 
less protein than what they actually need. Positive nitrogen balance 
occurs when a person excretes less nitrogen than what is taken 
in by the diet, such as during child growth or pregnancy. At these 
times the body requires more protein to build new tissues, so more 
of what gets consumed gets used up and less nitrogen is excreted. A 
person healing from a severe wound may also be in positive nitrogen 
balance because protein is being used up to repair tissues. 
Dietary Sources of Protein 
The protein food group consists of foods made from meat, seafood, 
poultry, eggs, soy, dry beans, peas, and seeds. According to the 
Harvard School of Public Health, “animal protein and vegetable 
protein probably have the same effects on health. It’s the protein 
package that’s likely to make a difference.”1 
1. Protein: The Bottom Line. Harvard School of Public 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  411


Simply put, different protein sources differ in their additional 
components, so it is necessary to pay attention to the whole 
nutrient “package.” Protein-rich animal-based foods commonly 
have high amounts of B vitamins, vitamin E, iron, magnesium, and 
zinc. Seafood often contains healthy fats, and plant sources of 
protein contain a high amount of fiber. Some animal-based protein-
rich foods have an unhealthy amount of saturated fat and 
cholesterol. When choosing your dietary sources of protein, take 
note of the other nutrients and also the non-nutrients, such as 
cholesterol, dyes, and preservatives, in order to make good 
selections that will benefit your health. For instance, a hamburger 
patty made from 80 percent lean meat contains 22 grams of protein, 
5.7 grams of saturated fat, and 77 milligrams of cholesterol. A burger 
made from 95 percent lean meat also contains 22 grams of protein, 
but has 2.3 grams of saturated fat and 60 milligrams of cholesterol. 
A cup of boiled soybeans contains 29 grams of protein, 2.2 grams of 
saturated fat, and no cholesterol. For more comparisons of protein-
rich foods, see Table 6.3 “Sources of Dietary Protein”. To find out 
the complete nutrient package of different foods, visit the US 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food Composition Databases. 
Table 6.3 Sources of Dietary Protein 
Health. The Nutrition Source. 
http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/what-
should-you-eat/protein/. Published 2012. Accessed 
September 30, 2017. 
412  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


Food 
Protein 
Content (g) 
Saturated 
Fat (g) 
Cholesterol 
(mg) 
Calories 
Hamburger patty 3 
oz. (80% lean) 
22.0 
5.7 
77 
230 
Hamburger patty 3 
oz. (95% lean) 
22.0 
2.3 
60 
139 
Top sirloin 3 oz. 
25.8 
2.0 
76 
158 
Beef chuck 3 oz. (lean, 
trimmed) 
22.2 
1.8 
51 
135 
Pork loin 3 oz. 
24.3 
3.0 
69 
178 
Pork ribs (country 
style, 1 piece) 
56.4 
22.2 
222 
790 
Chicken breast 
(roasted, 1 c.) 
43.4 
1.4 
119 
231 
Chicken thigh 
(roasted, 1 thigh) 
13.5 
1.6 
49 
109 
Chicken leg (roasted, 1 
leg) 
29.6 
4.2 
105 
264 
Salmon 3 oz. 
18.8 
2.1 
54 
175 
Tilapia 3 oz. 
22.2 
0.8 
48 
109 
Halibut 3 oz. 
22.7 
0.4 
35 
119 
Shrimp 3 oz. 
17.8 
0.2 
166 
84 
Shrimp (breaded, 
fried, 6–8 pcs.) 
18.9 
5.4 
200 
454 
Tuna 3 oz. (canned) 
21.7 
0.2 
26 
99 
Soybeans 1 c. (boiled) 
29.0 
2.2 
0 
298 
Lentils 1 c. (boiled) 
17.9 
0.1 
0 
226 
Kidney beans 1 c. 
(canned) 
13.5 
0.2 
0 
215 
Sunflower seeds 1 c. 
9.6 
2.0 
0 
269 
The USDA provides some tips for choosing your dietary protein 
sources. Their motto is, “Go Lean with Protein”. The overall 
suggestion is to eat a variety of protein-rich foods to benefit health. 
The USDA recommends lean meats, such as round steaks, top 
sirloin, extra lean ground beef, pork loin, and skinless chicken. 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  413


Additionally, a person should consume 8 ounces of cooked seafood 
every week (typically as two 4-ounce servings) to assure they are 
getting the healthy omega-3 fatty acids that have been linked to a 
lower risk for heart disease. Another tip is choosing to eat dry beans, 
peas, or soy products as a main dish. Some of the menu choices 
include chili with kidney and pinto beans, hummus on pita bread, 
and black bean enchiladas. You could also enjoy nuts in a variety of 
ways. You can put them on a salad, in a stir-fry, or use them as a 
topping for steamed vegetables in place of meat or cheese. If you do 
not eat meat, the USDA has much more information on how to get 
all the protein you need from a plant-based diet. When choosing the 
best protein-rich foods to eat, pay attention to the whole nutrient 
package and remember to select from a variety of protein sources 
to get all the other essential micronutrients. 
Protein Quality 
While protein is contained in a wide variety of foods, it differs in 
quality. High-quality protein contains all the essential amino acids 
in the proportions needed by the human body. The amino acid 
profile of different foods is therefore one component of protein 
quality. Foods that contain some of the essential amino acids are 
called incomplete protein sources, while those that contain all nine 
essential amino acids are called complete protein sources, or high-
quality protein sources. Foods that are complete protein sources 
include animal foods such as milk, cheese, eggs, fish, poultry, and 
meat, and a few plant foods, such as soy and quinoa. The only 
animal-based protein that is not complete is gelatin, which is made 
of the protein, collagen. 
Figure 6.18 Complete and Incomplete Protein Sources 
414  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


Protein-rich 
Foods by 
Smastronard
o / CC 
BY-SA 4.0 
Examples of complete protein sources include soy, dairy products, 
meat, and seafood. Examples of incomplete protein sources include 
legumes and corn. 
Most plant-based foods are deficient in at least one essential 
amino acid and therefore are incomplete protein sources. For 
example, grains are usually deficient in the amino acid lysine, and 
legumes are deficient in methionine or tryptophan. Because grains 
and legumes are not deficient in the same amino acids they can 
complement each other in a diet. Incomplete protein foods are 
called complementary foods because when consumed in tandem 
they contain all nine essential amino acids at adequate levels. Some 
examples of complementary protein foods are given in Table 6.4 
“Complementing Protein Sources the Vegan Way”. Complementary 
protein sources do not have to be consumed at the same time—as 
long as they are consumed within the same day, you will meet your 
protein needs. 
Table 6.4 Complementing Protein Sources the Vegan Way 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  415


Foods 
Lacking Amino 
Acids 
Complementary 
Food 
Complementary 
Menu 
Legumes 
Methionine, 
tryptophan 
Grains, nuts, 
and seeds 
Hummus and 
whole-wheat pita 
Grains 
Lysine, isoleucine, 
threonine 
Legumes 
Cornbread and 
kidney bean chili 
Nuts and 
seeds 
Lysine, isoleucine 
Legumes 
Stir-fried tofu with 
cashews 
The second component of protein quality is digestibility, as not 
all protein sources are equally digested. In general, animal-based 
proteins are completely broken down during the process of 
digestion, whereas plant-based proteins are not. This is because 
some proteins are contained in the plant’s fibrous cell walls and 
these pass through the digestive tract unabsorbed by the body. 
Protein Digestibility Corrected Amino Acid 
Score (PDCAAS) 
The PDCAAS is a method adopted by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to determine a food’s protein quality. It is 
calculated using a formula that incorporates the total amount of 
amino acids in the food and the amount of protein in the food that 
is actually digested by humans. The food’s protein quality is then 
ranked against the foods highest in protein quality. Milk protein, egg 
whites, whey, and soy all have a ranking of one, the highest ranking. 
Other foods’ ranks are listed in Table 6.5 “PDCAAS of Various Foods”. 
Table 6.5 PDCAAS of Various Foods 
416  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


Food 
PDCAAS* 
Milk protein 
1.00 
Egg white 
1.00 
Whey 
1.00 
Soy protein 
1.00 
Beef 
0.92 
Soybeans 
0.91 
Chickpeas 
0.78 
Fruits 
0.76 
Vegetables 
0.73 
Whole wheat 
0.42 
*1 is the highest rank, 0 is the lowest 
Protein Needs: Special Considerations 
Some groups may need to examine how to meet their protein needs 
more closely than others. We will take a closer look at the special 
protein considerations for vegetarians, the elderly, and athletes. 
Vegetarians and Vegans 
People who follow variations of the vegetarian diet and consume 
eggs and/or dairy products can meet their protein requirements 
by consuming adequate amounts of these foods. Vegetarians and 
vegans can also attain their recommended protein intakes if they 
give a little more attention to high-quality plant-based protein 
sources. However, when following a vegetarian diet, the amino acid 
lysine can be challenging to acquire. Grains, nuts, and seeds are 
lysine-poor foods, but tofu, soy, quinoa, and pistachios are all good 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  417


sources of lysine. Following a vegetarian diet and getting the 
recommended protein intake is also made a little more difficult 
because the digestibility of plant-based protein sources is lower 
than the digestibility of animal-based protein. 
To begin planning a more plant-based diet, start by finding out 
which types of food you want to eat and in what amounts you should 
eat them to ensure that you get the protein you need. The Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committee (DGAC) has analyzed how three 
different, plant-based dietary patterns can meet the recommended 
dietary guidelines for all nutrients.2 
The diets are defined in the following manner: 
• Plant-based. Fifty percent of protein is obtained from plant 
foods. 
• Lacto-ovo vegetarian. All animal products except eggs and 
dairy are eliminated. 
• Vegan. All animal products are eliminated. 
These diets are analyzed and compared to the more common 
dietary pattern of Americans, which is referred to as the USDA Base 
Diet. Table 6.6 “Percentage of “Meat and Beans Group” Components 
in the USDA Base Diet, and Three Vegetarian Variations” and Table 
7.7 “Proportions of Milk Products and Calcium-Fortified Soy 
Products in the Base USDA Patterns and Three Vegetarian 
Variations” can be used to help determine what percentage of 
certain foods to eat when following a different dietary pattern. The 
percentages of foods in the different groups are the proportions 
2. Jacobs DR, et al. (2009).  Food, Plant Food, and 
Vegetarian Diets in the US Dietary Guidelines: 
Conclusions of an Expert Panel. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 89(5). http://ajcn.nutrition.org/
content/89/5/1549S.short. 
418  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


consumed by the population, so that, on average, Americans obtain 
44.6 percent of their foods in the meat and beans group from meats. 
If you choose to follow a lacto-ovo vegetarian diet, the meats, 
poultry, and fish can be replaced by consuming a higher percentage 
of soy products, nuts, seeds, dry beans, and peas. As an aside, the 
DGAC notes that these dietary patterns may not exactly align with 
the typical diet patterns of people in the United States. However, 
they do say that they can be adapted as a guide to develop a more 
plant-based diet that does not significantly affect nutrient 
adequacy. 
Table 6.6 Percentage of “Meat and Beans Group” Components in 
the USDA Base Diet, and Three Vegetarian Variations 
Food Category 
Base USDA 
(%) 
Plant-Based 
(%) 
Lacto-Ovo 
Vegetarian (%) 
Vegan 
(%) 
Meats 
44.6 
10.5 
0 
0 
Poultry 
27.9 
8.0 
0 
0 
Fish (high 
omega-3) 
2.2 
3.0 
0 
0 
Fish (low 
omega-3) 
7.1 
10.0 
0 
0 
Eggs 
7.9 
7.6 
10.0 
0 
Soy products 
0.9 
15.0 
30.0 
25.0 
Nuts and 
seeds 
9.4 
20.9 
35.0 
40.0 
Dry beans and 
peas 
n/a* 
25.0 
25.0 
35.0 
Total 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
*The dry beans and peas are in the vegetable food group of the base 
diet. 
Source:  Vegetarian Food Patterns: Food Pattern Modeling Analysis. 
US 
Department 
of 
Agriculture. 
Appendix 
E-3.3. 
http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/DietaryGuidelines/2010/
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  419


DGAC/Report/AppendixE-3-3-Vegetarian.pdf. 
Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
Table 6.7 Proportions of Milk Products and Calcium-Fortified Soy 
Products in the Base USDA Patterns and Three Vegetarian 
Variations 
Food Category 
Base 
USDA (%) 
Plant-based 
(%) 
Lacto-ovo 
vegetarian (%) 
Vegan 
(%) 
Fluid milk 
54.6 
54.6 
54.6 
0 
Yogurt 
1.6 
1.6 
1.6 
0 
Cheese 
42.7 
42.7 
42.7 
0 
Soy milk (w/ 
calcium) 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
67.0 
Rice milk (w/ 
calcium) 
0 
0 
0 
16.0 
Tofu (w/ 
calcium) 
0 
0 
0 
15.0 
Soy yogurt 
0 
0 
0 
2.0 
Total 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
Source: Vegetarian Food Patterns: Food Pattern Modeling Analysis. 
US 
Department 
of 
Agriculture. 
Appendix 
E-3.3. 
http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/DietaryGuidelines/2010/
DGAC/Report/AppendixE-3-3-Vegetarian.pdf. 
Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
From these analyses the DGAC concluded that the plant-based, 
lacto-ovo vegetarian, and vegan diets do not significantly affect 
nutrient adequacy. Additionally, the DGAC states that people who 
choose to obtain proteins solely from plants should include foods 
fortified with vitamins B12, D, and calcium. Other nutrients of 
concern may be omega-3 fatty acids and choline. 
420  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


The Elderly 
As we age, muscle mass gradually declines. This is a process referred 
to as sarcopenia. A person is sarcopenic when their amount of 
muscle tissue is significantly lower than the average value for a 
healthy person of the same age. A significantly lower muscle mass 
is associated with weakness, movement disorders, and a generally 
poor quality of life. It is estimated that about half the US population 
of men and women above the age of eighty are sarcopenic. A review 
published in the September 2010 issue of Clinical Intervention in 
Aging demonstrates that higher intakes (1.2 to 1.5 grams per 
kilogram of weight per day) of high-quality protein may prevent 
aging adults from becoming sarcopenic.3 
Currently, the RDA for protein for elderly persons is the same as 
that for the rest of the adult population, but several clinical trials are 
ongoing and are focused on determining the amount of protein in 
the diet that prevents the significant loss of muscle mass specifically 
in older adults. 
Athletes 
Muscle tissue is rich in protein composition and has a very high 
3. Waters DL, et al. (2010). Advantages of Dietary, Exercise-
Related, and Therapeutic Interventions to Prevent and 
Treat Sarcopenia in Adult Patients: An Update. Clinical 
Interventions in Aging, 5, 259–70. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2938033/?tool=pubmed. Accessed September 28, 
2017. 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  421


turnover rate. During exercise, especially when it is performed for 
longer than two to three hours, muscle tissue is broken down and 
some of the amino acids are catabolized to fuel muscle contraction. 
To avert excessive borrowing of amino acids from muscle tissue to 
synthesize energy during prolonged exercise, protein needs to be 
obtained from the diet. Intense exercise, such as strength training, 
stresses muscle tissue so that afterward, the body adapts by 
building bigger, stronger, and healthier muscle tissue. The body 
requires protein post-exercise to accomplish this. The IOM does 
not set different RDAs for protein intakes for athletes, but the AND, 
the American College of Sports Medicine, and Dietitians of Canada 
have the following position statements4: 
Nitrogen balance studies suggest that dietary protein intake 
necessary to support nitrogen balance in endurance athletes 
ranges from 1.2 to 1.4 grams per kilogram of body weight per 
day. 
Recommended protein intakes for strength-trained athletes 
range from approximately 1.2 to 1.7 grams per kilogram of 
weight per day. 
An endurance athlete who weighs 170 pounds should take in 93 
to 108 grams of protein per day (170 ÷ 2.2 × 1.2 and 170 ÷ 2.2 × 
1.4). On a 3,000-kilocalorie diet, that amount is between 12 and 14 
4. American College of Sports Medicine, Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics, and Dietitians of Canada. (2009). 
Joint Position Statement: Nutrition and Athletic 
Performance. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 
41(3), 709-31. http://journals.lww.com/acsm-msse/
fulltext/2009/03000/
Nutrition_and_Athletic_Performance.27.aspx. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
422  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


percent of total kilocalories and within the AMDR. There is general 
scientific agreement that endurance and strength athletes should 
consume protein from high-quality sources, such as dairy, eggs, 
lean meats, or soy; however eating an excessive amount of protein 
at one time does not further stimulate muscle-protein synthesis. 
Nutrition experts also recommend that athletes consume some 
protein within one hour after exercise to enhance muscle tissue 
repair during the recovery phase, but some carbohydrates and 
water should be consumed as well. The recommended ratio from 
nutrition experts for exercise-recovery foods is 4 grams of 
carbohydrates to 1 gram of protein. 
Table 6.8 Snacks for Exercise Recovery 
Foods 
Protein 
(g) 
Carbohydrates 
(g) 
Calories 
Whole grain cereal with nonfat 
milk 
14 
53 
260 
Medium banana with nonfat milk 10 
39 
191 
Power bar 
10 
43 
250 
In response to hard training, a person’s body also adapts by 
becoming more efficient in metabolizing nutrient fuels both for 
energy production and building macromolecules. However, this 
raises another question: if athletes are more efficient at using 
protein, is it necessary to take in more protein from dietary sources 
than the average person? There are two scientific schools of 
thought on this matter. One side believes athletes need more 
protein and the other thinks the protein requirements of athletes 
are the same as for nonathletes. There is scientific evidence to 
support both sides of this debate. The consensus of both sides is 
that few people exercise at the intensity that makes this debate 
relevant. It is good to remember that the increased protein intake 
recommended by the AND, American College of Sports Medicine, 
and Dietitians of Canada still lies within the AMDR for protein. 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  423


Protein Supplements 
Protein supplements include powders made from compounds such 
as whey, soy or amino acids that either come as a powder or in 
capsules. We have noted that the protein requirements for most 
people, even those that are active, is not high. Is taking protein 
supplements ever justified, then? Neither protein nor amino acid 
supplements have been scientifically proven to improve exercise 
performance or increase strength. In addition, the average 
American already consumes more protein than is required. Despite 
these facts, many highly physically active individuals use protein or 
amino acid supplements. According to the AND, American College 
of Sports Medicine, and Dietitians of Canada, “the current evidence 
indicates that protein and amino acid supplements are no more or 
no less effective than food when energy is adequate for gaining lean 
body mass.”5 
Branched-chain amino acids, such as leucine, are often touted 
as a way to build muscle tissue and enhance athletic performance. 
Despite these marketing claims, a review in the June 2005 issue of 
The Journal of Nutrition shows that most studies that evaluated a 
variety of exercise types failed to show any performance-enhancing 
effects of taking branched-chain amino acids.6 
5. American College of Sports Medicine, Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics, and Dietitians of Canada. (2009). 
Joint Position Statement: Nutrition and Athletic 
Performance. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 
41(3), 709-31. http://journals.lww.com/acsm-msse/
fulltext/2009/03000/
Nutrition_and_Athletic_Performance.27.aspx. Accessed 
September 28, 2017. 
6. Gleeson, M. (2005). Interrelationship between Physical 
424  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


Moreover, the author of this review claims that high-quality 
protein foods are a better and cheaper source for branched-chain 
amino acids and says that a chicken breast (100 grams) contains 
the equivalent of seven times the amount of branched-chain amino 
acids as one supplement tablet. This means if you are interested 
in enhancing exercise performance or building muscle, you do not 
need to support the $20 billion supplement industry. 
Although the evidence for protein and amino acid supplements 
impacting athletic performance is lacking, there is some scientific 
evidence that supports consuming high-quality dairy proteins, such 
as casein and whey, and soy proteins positively influences muscle 
recovery in response to hard training. If you choose to buy a bucket 
of whey protein, use it to make a protein shake after an intense 
workout and do not add more than what is required to obtain 20 
to 25 grams of protein. As always, choosing high-quality protein 
foods will help you build muscle and not empty your wallet as 
much as buying supplements. Moreover, relying on supplements 
for extra protein instead of food will not provide you with any of 
the other essential nutrients. The bottom line is that whether you 
are an endurance athlete or strength athlete, or just someone who 
takes Zumba classes, there is very little need to put your money 
into commercially sold protein and amino acid supplements. The 
evidence to show that they are superior to regular food in 
enhancing exercise performance is not sufficient. 
What about the numerous protein shakes and protein bars on 
the market? Are they a good source of dietary protein? Do they 
help you build muscle or lose weight as marketers claim? These 
are not such a bad idea for an endurance or strength athlete who 
has little time to fix a nutritious exercise-recovery snack. However, 
Activity and Branched-Chain Amino Acids.  Journal of 
Nutrition, 135(6), 1591S–5S. http://jn.nutrition.org/
content/135/6/1591S.long. Accessed October 1, 2017. 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  425


before you ingest any supplement, do your homework. Read the 
label, be selective, and don’t use them to replace meals, but rather 
as exercise-recovery snacks now and then. Some protein bars have 
a high amount of carbohydrates from added sugars and are not 
actually the best source for protein, especially if you are not an 
athlete. Protein bars are nutritionally designed to restore 
carbohydrates and protein after endurance or strength training; 
therefore they are not good meal replacements. If you want a low-
cost alternative after an intense workout, make yourself a peanut 
butter sandwich on whole-grain bread and add some sliced banana 
for less than fifty cents. 
Supermarket and health-food store shelves offer an extraordinary 
number of high-protein shake mixes. While the carbohydrate count 
is lower now in some of these products than a few years ago, they 
still contain added fats and sugars. They also cost, on average, more 
than two dollars per can. If you want more nutritional bang for your 
buck, make your own shakes from whole foods. Use the AMDRs for 
macronutrients as a guide to fill up the blender. Your homemade 
shake can now replace some of the whole foods on your breakfast, 
lunch, or dinner plate. Unless you are an endurance or strength 
athlete and consume commercially sold protein bars and shakes 
only postexercise, these products are not a good dietary source of 
protein. 
Learning Activities 
Technology Note: The second edition of the Human 
Nutrition Open Educational Resource (OER) textbook 
426  |  Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices


features interactive learning activities.  These activities are 
available in the web-based textbook and not available in the 
downloadable versions (EPUB, Digital PDF, Print_PDF, or 
Open Document). 
Learning activities may be used across various mobile 
devices, however, for the best user experience it is strongly 
recommended that users complete these activities using a 
desktop or laptop computer and in Google Chrome. 
 
An interactive or media element has been 
excluded from this version of the text. You can 
view it online here: 
http://pressbooks.oer.hawaii.edu/
humannutrition2/?p=274 
 
Proteins, Diet, and Personal Choices  |  427


